CODEX SINAITICUS:
The New Testament in English
Translated from the Sinaitic Manuscript
Discovered by Constantine Tischendorf
at Mt. Sinai by H. T. Anderson
And begun in 1861
Edited by
Jackson Snyder
Jack L. Williams
Roy Shurtleff Miller2
Codex Sinaiticus:
Codex Sinaiticus:
The H. T. Anderson New Testament
© 2004-2010 Jackson H. Snyder II
All Rights Reserved
ISBN 978-0-557-34102-3 Hardcover
In Memory of Roy Shurtleff Miller 1950 - 2009
Though we have combed the text for errors, you may find
some. Please report them to Apostolia.com.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
CONTENTS
4 Prefaces
14 According to Matthew
70 According to Mark
104 According to Luke
164 According to John
210 Acts of the Apostles
266 Acts 29, Sonnini Manuscript
270 Paul to the Romans
294 Paul to the Corinthians 1st
318 Paul to the Corinthians 2nd
334 Paul to the Galatians
342 Paul to the Ephesians
350 Paul to the Philippians
356 Paul to the Colossians
362 Paul to the Thessalonians 1st
368 Paul to the Thessalonians 2nd
372 Paul to Timothy 1st
378 Paul to Timothy 2nd
384 Paul to Titus
388 Paul to Philemon
390 Epistle of Hebrews
408 Epistle of James
414 Epistle of Peter 1st
420 Epistle of Peter 2nd
424 Epistle of John 1st
430 Epistle of John 2nd
432 Epistle of John 3rd
434 Epistle of Jude
436 Revelation of Jesus Christ
464 Epistle of Barnabas
488 Shepherd of Hermas
588 Didachē or Teaching of the Twelve
34
Codex Sinaiticus:
Editor’s Preface
English translations of the Sinaiticus are rare enough; but
Anderson’s New Testament is unique. We hope the reader will
appreciate the literacy,
accuracy and authenticity of
this work – which was the
goal of the translator’s life
and the editors’ passion.
Anderson did not translate
The Shepherd or Epistle of
Barnabas. The Barnabas
here is based on Hoole’s
1885 re-edited by Ted
Dornan in 2007. The
Lightfoot translation of The
Shepherd of Hermas is
offered here to make the
corpus complete. The
Sinaitic manuscript is
missing enough pages at the end to account for the inclusion of
The Didachē or Teaching of the Twelve, which we suspect
would have been close to its companion text, Barnabas. For
good measure, I added the Sonnini Manuscript, St. Paul in
Great Britain, in the place of Acts 29.
(As of 2010, I have new, annotated English translations of the
Didachē and Barnabas, each interpaginated with the Received
Greek text, available in Hebraic Roots versions at
www.Apostolia.com.)
We recommend two books that may be helpful in
understanding the rightful place of Sinaiticus in the history of
the canon: Bart Ehrman’s Lost Scriptures: Books That Did
Not make It Into the New Testament (2003) and
Encountering the Manuscripts: An Introduction to New
Testament Paleography & Textual Criticism, Philip Wesley
Comfort, (2005).
Codex Sinaiticus, from Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.
Codex Sinaiticus is a 4th century uncial manuscript of the
Greek Bible, written between 330–350. While it originally
contained the whole of both Testaments, only portions of theThe H. T. Anderson New Testament
5
Greek Old Testament or Septuagint survive, along with a
complete New Testament, the Epistle of Barnabas, and
portions of The Shepherd of Hermas (suggesting that the latter
two may have been considered part of Biblical canon by the
editors of the codex). Along with Codex Vaticanus, Codex
Sinaiticus is one of the most valuable manuscripts for textual
criticism of the Greek New Testament, as well as the
Septuagint. For most of the New Testament, Codex Sinaiticus
is in general agreement with Codex Vaticanus and Codex
Ephraemi Rescriptus, attesting an Alexandrian text-type, but
in John 1:1-8:38, Codex Sinaiticus is in closer agreement with
Codex Bezae in support of a Western text-type. A notable
example of an agreement between the Sinaiticus and Vaticanus
texts is that they both omit the phrase “without cause” from
Matthew 5:22.
The entire codex consists of 346½ folios, written in four
columns. Of these, 199 belong to the Old Testament and 147½
belong to the New Testament, along with two other books, the
Epistle of Barnabas and part of The Shepherd of Hermas. The
books of the New Testament are arranged in this order: the
four Gospels, the epistles of Paul, the Acts of the Apostles, the
General Epistles, and the Book of Revelation.
Of its prior history, little is known. It is speculated to have
been written in Egypt and is sometimes associated with the 50
copies of the scriptures commissioned by Roman Emperor
Constantine after his conversion to Christianity.
A paleographical study at the British Museum in 1938 found
that the text had undergone several corrections. The first
corrections were done by several scribes before the manuscript
left the scriptorium. In the sixth or seventh century many
alterations were made, which, according to a colophon at the
end of the book of Esdras and Esther states, that the source of
these alterations was “a very ancient manuscript that had been
corrected by the hand of the holy martyr Pamphylus“
(martyred AD 309). From this is concluded, that it had been in
Caesarea Maritima in the 6th or 7th centuries. Uncorrected is
the pervasive iotacism, especially of the ει diphthong.
The Codex Sinaiticus was shown to Constantin von
Tischendorf on his third visit to the Monastery of Saint
Catherine, at the foot of Mount Sinai in Egypt, in 1859. The
first two trips had yielded parts of the Old Testament, some6
Codex Sinaiticus:
found in a basket of manuscript pieces, which Tischendorf was
told by a librarian “were rubbish which was to be destroyed by
burning it in the ovens of the monastery.” (However, this story
may have been a fabrication, or the manuscripts in question
may been unrelated to Codex Sinaiticus: Rev. J. Silvester
Davies in 1863 quoted
“a monk of Sinai who ... stated that according to the librarian
of the monastery the whole of Codex Sinaiticus had been in the
library for many years and was marked in the ancient
catalogues ... Is it likely ... that a manuscript known in the
library catalogue would have been jettisoned in the rubbish
basket.”
Indeed, it has been noted that the leaves were in “suspiciously
good condition” for something found in the trash.) Tischendorf
had been sent to search for manuscripts by Russia’s Tsar
Alexander II, who was convinced there were still manuscripts
to be found at the Sinai monastery. In May 1975, during
restoration work, the monks of St. Catherine’s monastery
discovered a room beneath the St. George Chapel which
contained many parchment fragments. Among these
fragments were twelve missing leaves from the Sinaiticus Old
Testament.
The story of how von Tischendorf found the manuscript, which
contained most of the Old Testament and all of the New
Testament, has all the interest of a romance. Von Tischendorf
reached the monastery on January 31; but his inquiries
appeared to be fruitless. On February 4, he had resolved to
return home without having gained his object:
On the afternoon of this day I was taking a walk with the
steward of the convent in the neighbourhood, and as we
returned, towards sunset, he begged me to take some
refreshment with him in his cell. Scarcely had he entered the
room, when, resuming our former subject of conversation, he
said: “And I, too, have read a Septuagint” — i.e. a copy of the
Greek translation made by the Seventy. And so saying, he took
down from the corner of the room a bulky kind of volume,
wrapped up in a red cloth, and laid it before me. I unrolled the
cover, and discovered, to my great surprise, not only those very
fragments which, fifteen years before, I had taken out of the
basket, but also other parts of the Old Testament, the NewThe H. T. Anderson New Testament
7
Testament complete, and, in addition, the Epistle of Barnabas
and a part of the Shepherd of Hermas.
After some negotiations, he obtained possession of this
precious fragment. James Bentley gives an account of how this
came about, prefacing it with the comment, “Tischendorf
therefore now embarked on the remarkable piece of duplicity
which was to occupy him for the next decade, which involved
the careful suppression of facts and the systematic denigration
of the monks of Mount Sinai.”[5] He conveyed it to Tsar
Alexander, who appreciated its importance and had it
published as nearly as possible in facsimile, so as to exhibit
correctly the ancient handwriting. The Tsar sent the monastery
9,000 rubles by way of compensation.
Regarding Tischendorf’s role in the transfer to Saint
Petersburg, there are several views. Although when parts of
Genesis and Book of Numbers were later found in the bindings
of other books, they were amicably sent to Tischendorf, the
codex is currently regarded by the monastery as having been
stolen, is a view hotly contested by several scholars in Europe.
In a more neutral spirit, New Testament scholar Bruce
Metzger writes:
Certain aspects of the negotiations leading to the transfer of
the codex to the Czar’s possession are open to an
interpretation that reflects adversely on Tischendorf’s candour
and good faith with the monks at St. Catherine’s. For a recent
account intended to exculpate him of blame, see Erhard
Lauch’s article ‘Nichts gegen Tischendorf’ in Bekenntnis zur
Kirche: Festgabe für Ernst Sommerlath zum 70. Geburtstag
(Berlin, c. 1961); for an account that includes a hitherto
unknown receipt given by Tischendorf to the authorities at the
monastery promising to return the manuscript from St.
Petersburg ‘to the Holy Confraternity of Sinai at its earliest
request’, see Ihor Ševčenko’s article ‘New Documents on
Tischendorf and the Codex Sinaiticus’, published in the journal
Scriptorium, xviii (1964) pp. 55–80.
For many decades, the Codex was preserved in the Russian
National Library. In 1933, the Soviet Union sold the codex to
the British Library for £100,000. Visitors in our day report
that the monks at St. Catherine’s Monastery display the receipt
they received from Tischendorf for the Codex, in a frame that
hangs upon the wall.8
Codex Sinaiticus:
One theological controversy arising from the content of the
Codex Sinaiticus are the different writing styles in the Gospel
of Mark, indicating the addition of the Resurrection in a
different, more informal hand (possibly to an earlier, shorter
version of Mark that finished with the empty Tomb).
Present Location
The codex is now split into four unequal portions: 347 leaves
in the British Library in London, 12 leaves and 14 fragments in
St. Catherine’s Monastery of Sinai, 43 leaves in the Leipzig
University Library, and fragments of 3 leaves in the Russian
National Library in St Petersburg.
In June 2005, a joint project to produce a new digital edition
of the manuscript (involving all four holding libraries) and a
series of other studies was announced. This will include the
use of hyperspectral imaging to photograph the manuscripts to
look for hidden information such as erased or faded text. This
is to be done in cooperation with the British Library. (2010:
the project continues at
www.codexsinaiticus.org/en/manuscript.aspx.)
Bibliography
Bruce M. Metzger, The Text of the New Testament, its Transmission,
Corruption and Restoration, Oxford University Press, 1992, p. 46.
Skeat, T. C. “The Last Chapter in the History of the Codex Sinaiticus.”
Novum Testamentum. Vol. 42, Fasc. 3, Jul., 2000. p. 313
Davies words are from a letter published in The Guardian on 27 May
1863, as quoted by J.K. Elliott in Codex Sinaiticus and the Simonides
Affair, (Thessaloniki: Patriarchal Institute for Patristic Studies,
1982), p. 16; Elliott in turn is quoted by Michael D. Peterson in his
essay “Tischendorf and the Codex Sinaiticus: the Saga Continues”, in
The Church and the Library, ed. Papademetriou and Sopko (Boston:
Somerset Hall Press, 2005), p. 77. See also notes 2 and 3, p. 90, in
Papademetriou.
Constantin von Tischendorf, The Discovery of the Sinaitic
Manuscript, Extract from Constantin von Tischendorf, When Were
Our Gospels Written? An Argument by Constantine Tischendorf.
With a Narrative of the Discovery of the Sinaitic Manuscript [New
York: American Tract Society, 1866].
James Bentley, Secrets of Mount Sinai (Garden City, NY: Doubleday,
1986), p. 95.
This entry incorporates text from the public domain Easton’s Bible
Dictionary, originally published in 1897. The editors accessed this
article from Wikipedia October 25, 2007.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
9
Henry Tompkins Anderson was born in Caroline
County, Va., January 27,
1812. His parents were
natives of that State and
were of the Baptist faith;
however, they were liberal
in their views. The early
training of young Anderson
was in harmony, in a large
measure, with the simple
teachings of the Bible. In
his father’s home the Bible
was a daily textbook, and
its teaching had a powerful
influence upon the youthful
mind of H. T. Anderson. At
the age of twenty-one he
confessed his faith in his
Lord and was baptized by his elder brother. His brother
had left the Baptist Church and was only a Christian.
Henry T. renewed his prayerful study of the Bible and
made rapid progress in developing his spiritual life. He
began to preach in May, 1833, about ten months after his
baptism.
He had a unique method of studying the Scriptures. He
left nothing without mastering to the best of his ability
every word and sentence of the New Testament. He had
been educated in the best schools of Virginia at that time,
and he brought his learning into use in the study of the
New Testament. He began early to study the New
Testament in the original Greek as well as in the English.
He became as familiar with the Greek text of the New
Testament as he was with the English text. He never
ceased to study the New Testament in Greek.
He remained in Virginia and preached in his native
county and surrounding counties until 1837, at which
time he moved to Kentucky, and taught school for a
number of years in Southern Kentucky. He never ceased10
Codex Sinaiticus:
to preach the gospel as opportunity was given him. He
preached much in Christian and Todd counties. In 1841
he was invited to come to Nashville, Tenn. He accepted
the invitation and labored with the congregation in
Nashville for several months. Part of this time he made
his home with Tolbert Fanning, who lived near Nashville.
In 1847 he was called to preach for the Walnut Street
Church, Louisville, Ky., and continued his work with that
church for six years. After leaving the Walnut Street
Church he resumed his teaching and taught successfully
in various parts of Kentucky.
In 1861 he began the translation of the New Testament
from the Greek into the English language. He gave the
best part of his life to this work. He levied tribute on all of
the resources of his classical mind and liberal education
and gave all to the great task of translating the New
Testament. This was the masterpiece of his life’s work. He
saw from the reading of the Authorized Version that there
was a need for this translation, and with a consecrated
heart he dedicated his all to the task. He speaks of his
work as follows: “The work has been carried on under
many adverse circumstances, but, by the good providence
of God, it has been completed.” He was about three and a
half years making this translation. After he had
completed it he breathed a prayer of thanksgiving to God
for permitting him to finish the task. He sent his
translation out with this prayer: “May it go forth, under
the divine blessing, to establish and comfort the hearts of
those who love the truth.” Many scholars have
pronounced this translation the best in the English
language. Certainly it has many merits and is a
monument to the love, scholarship, and prayerful work of
a man who loved supremely the word of God. The
brotherhood has been blessed and the literature of the
disciples of Christ has been enriched by this very valuable
contribution in the field of translation.
Henry T. Anderson had a strong mind which was adorned
with classical training. His preaching was not soThe H. T. Anderson New Testament
11
eloquent, but simple and practical. He was no pulpit
orator and laid no claims to such, but he was a teacher
both in the classroom and in the pulpit. He was no lover
of money, but was contented with just enough food and
raiment to live upon. Oftentimes, like many other faithful
preachers of the gospel then, he struggled through much
poverty and suffering. He was very poorly supported both
as a teacher and a preacher. It is thought that the
brotherhood generally did not know of his deep poverty
and necessity of the simple things of life. He did not
possess those winning traits of character which draw
people very close to him. He was kind and gentle to all,
but he was a student. He was so absorbed in his study
that he had not time, as he thought, to make and retain
friends. Possibly he saw this weakness, but his love for
study caused him to neglect the cultivation of the society
of his brethren and sisters. He suffered in poverty
without complaint. He did not censure the church or his
brethren for his poverty.
He believed firmly in the word of God. He trusted in God
to bring all things to Christ for his own glory and the
salvation of his servant. He had firm convictions, and he
had the courage to stand by these convictions. He did not
believe that a Christian should take vengeance or
retaliate. In the prime of his manhood, under the solemn
conviction that Christians are not allowed to take
vengeance or retaliate, he submitted gracefully to a
scourging or whipping from one who had become
offended at him. He did not complain, but took the
chastisement in the name of the Lord and suffered
meekly without any effort to strike back. He had complete
mastery of himself. He had the courage and
determination to suffer for Christ’s sake.
Probably no one had a faith more simple and wonderful
than did H. T. Anderson. While he was poor with respect
to the worldly things of this life, yet he was rich in faith
and strong and courageous in his conviction. When he
began his translation of the New Testament, he had a12
Codex Sinaiticus:
large family to support and a very meager salary or
income; yet he believed that the Lord would provide. In
speaking of his work in translating the New Testament,
he said that the Lord did provide and would continue to
do so unto the end.
H. T. Anderson was a “man of one book.” He studied the
Christian religion only; and the Bible, either in Greek or
English, was the only book he wanted or would have. He
had no desire to study other matters. He may have made
a mistake in not studying more in a general way, for near
the close of his life he unfortunately gave utterance to
some undigested metaphysical conclusions which were
held against him. Many made his conclusions a ground of
criticism. The enemies of the truth used them as weapons
against the truth. If he had given his attention to the
study of these questions earlier in life, he would not have
made such a blunder, and the enemies would not have
had the occasion to turn much of his good life and
teaching into weapons against the truth.
He was forced near the close of his life to give his services
to the government for bread. He accepted a governmental
position of minor importance and went to Washington,
D. C., and labored hard for his meat and bread. This was
sad, as he desired to give all of his time to the study of the
Bible and the teaching of the same to his fellows. He was
stricken with disease and suffered extremely before his
death. He died in the city of Washington, September 19,
1872. He had a pilgrimage on earth of sixty years, eight
months, and eight days. He died in the full assurance of
the Christian faith.
Biographical Sketches of Gospel Preachers, H. Leo Boles,
GA c.1932 page 165-169. Information with thanks from
Scott Harp, www.restoration.com.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
13
CODEX SINAITICUS:
The H. T. Anderson New Testament
with the additions of
The Sonnini Manuscript
The Letter of Barnabas
The Shepherd of Hermas
The Didachē14
Codex Sinaiticus:
According to Matthew
Matthew 1
1 The book of the genealogy of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son
of Abraham.
2 Abraham begot Isaac: Isaac begot Jacob: Jacob begot Judah and
his brothers:
3 Judah begot Pharez and Zerah of Tamar: Pharez begot Hezron:
Hezron begot Ram:
4 Ram begot Amminadab: Amminadab begot Nashon: Nashon begot
Salmon:
5 Salmon begot Boaz of Rahab: Boaz begot Obed of Ruth: Obed begot
Jesse:
6 Jesse begot David the king. David begot Solomon of the wife of
Uriah:
7 Solomon begot Rehoboam: Rehoboam begot Abijah: Abijah begot
Asa:
8 Asa begot Jehosaphat: Jehosaphat begot Jehoram: Jehoram begot
Uzziah:
9 Uzziah begot Jotham: Jotham begot Ahaz: Ahaz begot Hezekiah:
10 Hezekiah begot Manasseh: Manasseh begot Amon: Amon begot
Josiah:
11 Josiah begot Jeconiah and his brothers about the time of the
removal to Babylon.
12 But after the removal to Babylon, Jeconiah begot Shealtiel:
Shealtiel begot Zerubbabel:
13 Zerubbabel begot Abihud: Abihud begot Eliakim: Eliakim begot
Azor:
14 Azor begot Zadoc: Zadoc begot Achim: Achim begot Eliud:
15 Eliud begot Eleazar: Eleazar begot Matthan: Matthan begot Jacob:
16 Jacob begot Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus
who is called Christ.
17 So all the generations from Abraham till David, are fourteen
generations; and from David till the removal to Babylon, are fourteen
generations; and from the removal to Babylon till Christ, are fourteen
generations.
18 But the birth of Jesus Christ was thus: After his mother Mary had
been betrothed to Joseph, before they came together, she was found
with child of the Holy Spirit.
19 And Joseph her husband, being just and not willing to make her
an example, intended to put her away privately.
20 But while he thought of these things, behold, an angel of the Lord
appeared to him in a dream, saying: Joseph, son of David, fear not toThe H. T. Anderson New Testament
15
take to thee Mary thy wife; for that which is conceived in her is of the
Holy Spirit.
21 And she shall bear a son, and thou shalt call his name Jesus; for he
shall save his people from their sins.
22 And all this was done, that it might be fulfilled that was spoken by
the Lord through the prophet, saying:
23 Behold, the virgin shall be with child, and shall bear a son, and
they shall call his name Immanuel, which is, when translated, God
with us.
24 And Joseph arose from his sleep, and did as the angel of the Lord
had commanded him, and took to him his wife; and knew her not till
she had brought forth a son; and he called his name Jesus.
Matthew 2
1 But after Jesus had been born in Bethlehem of Judea, in the days of
Herod the king, behold, Magi from the east came to Jerusalem,
2 saying: Where is he that has been born king of the Jews? For we
saw his star at its rising, and have come to worship him.
3 And hearing it, king Herod was alarmed, and all Jerusalem with
him.
4 And he assembled all the chief priests and scribes of the people,
and inquired of them where the Christ should be born.
5 And they said to him: In Bethlehem of Judea; for thus it is written
by the prophet:
6 And thou, Bethlehem, land of Judah, art by no means the least
among the princes of Judah; for out of thee shall come a Governor,
who shall rule my people Israel.
7 Then Herod having secretly called the Magi, inquired of them
strictly the time at which the star appeared;
8 and sending them to Bethlehem, said: Go, make strict inquiry for
the young child: and when you have found him, bring me word, that I
also may go and worship him.
9 And after hearing the king, they departed; and lo, the star which
they had seen at its rising, went before them, till it came and stood
over where the young child was.
10 And when they saw the star, they rejoiced with very great joy.
11 And coming into the house, they saw the young child with Mary
his mother; and falling down they worshipped him; and having
opened their treasures they offered to him gifts, gold, and
frankincense, and myrrh.
12 And having been warned in a dream not to return to Herod, they
withdrew into their own country by another way.
13 But after they had withdrawn, behold, an angel of the Lord
appeared to Joseph in a dream, saying: Arise, and take the young16
Codex Sinaiticus:
child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and be there till I bring
thee word; for Herod is about to seek for the young child, to destroy
him.
14 And he arose and took the young child and his mother, by night,
and withdrew into Egypt,
15 and was there till the death of Herod: that it might be fulfilled that
was spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying: Out of Egypt I
called my Son.
16 Then Herod, seeing that he had been deceived by the Magi, was
greatly enraged; and, having sent out, he slew all the male children
that were in Bethlehem, and in all its borders, from the age of two
years and under, according to the time which he had strictly inquired
of the Magi.
17 Then was fulfilled that which was spoken through Jeremiah the
prophet, saying:
18 A voice was heard in Ramah, wailing and great mourning: Rachel
weeping for her children; and she would not be comforted because
they are no more.
19 But after Herod had died, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared in
a dream to Joseph in Egypt,
20 saying: Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and go
into the land of Israel; for they are dead that sought the young child’s
life.
21 And he arose and took the young child and his mother, and came
into the land of Israel.
22 But hearing that Archelaus reigned in Judea, in place of his father
Herod, he was afraid to go thither; but being warned in a dream, he
withdrew into the regions of Galilee,
23 and came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth, that it might be
fulfilled that was spoken through the prophets: He shall be called a
Nazarene.
Matthew 3
1 But in those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the
wilderness of Judea,
2 saying: Repent, for the kingdom of the heavens is at hand.
3 For this is he that was spoken of through Isaiah the prophet,
saying: The voice of one crying in the wilderness. Prepare the way of
the Lord, make his paths straight.
4 But the same John had his clothing of camel’s hair, and a girdle of
leather around his loins, and his food was locusts and wild honey.
5 Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region
round about the Jordan,
6 and were baptized by him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
17
7 But seeing many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to his
baptism, he said to them: Brood of vipers, who warned you to flee
from the coming wrath?
8 Bring forth therefore fruit worthy of repentance,
9 and think not to say within yourselves: We have Abraham for a
father; for I say to you that God is able of these stones to raise up
children for Abraham.
10 And now the ax is lying at the root of the trees: every tree,
therefore, that brings not forth good fruit is cut down, and thrown
into the fire.
11 I indeed baptize you in water in order to repentance; but he that
comes after me is mightier than I, whose sandals I am not worthy to
carry: he will baptize you in the Holy Spirit and in fire:
12 whose winnowing shovel is in his hand, and he will thoroughly
cleanse his threshing floor, and gather his grain into the granary; but
the chaff he will burn up with unquenchable fire.
13 Then came Jesus from Galilee to the Jordan to John, to be
baptized by him.
14 But he forbade him, saying: I have need to be baptized by thee,
and comest thou to me?
15 But Jesus answered and said to him: Permit it now; for thus it
becomes us to fulfill every righteous act. Then he permitted him.
16 And having been baptized, Jesus immediately went up from the
water; and lo, the heavens were opened, and he saw the Spirit of God
descending like a dove and coming upon him.
17 And lo, a voice from the heavens, saying: This is my beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased.
Matthew 4
1 Then was Jesus led up by the Spirit into the wilderness, to be
tempted by the devil.
2 And having fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward
hungry.
3 And the tempter came and said to him: If thou art the Son of God,
command that these stones become bread.
4 But he answered and said: It is written: Not by bread alone shall
man live, but by every word that comes forth through the mouth of
God.
5 Then the devil took him into the holy city, and set him on the wing
of the temple.
6 and said to him: If thou art the Son of God, cast thyself down; for it
is written: He will give his angels charge concerning thee, and in
their hands they shall take thee up, lest thou strike thy foot against a
stone.18
Codex Sinaiticus:
7 Jesus said to him: Again it is written: Thou shalt not put the Lord
thy God to the proof.
8 Again, the devil took him to a very high mountain, and showed him
all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them,
9 and said to him: All these will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and
worship me.
10 Then Jesus says to him: Get hence, Satan; for it is written: The
Lord thy God thou shalt worship, and him only shalt thou serve
11 Then the devil left him; and, behold, angels came and ministered
to him.
12 But when he had heard that John was delivered up, he withdrew
into Galilee;
13 and leaving Nazareth, he came and dwelt in Capernaum, which is
on the sea, in the borders of Zebulon and Naphtali;
14 that it might be fulfilled that was spoken through Isaiah the
prophet, saying:
15 The land of Zebulon, and the land of Naphtali, toward the sea,
beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles;
16 the people that sat in darkness saw great light; and upon those
who sat in the region and shadow of death light arose.
17 From that time Jesus began to preach and to say: Repent, for the
kingdom of the heavens is at hand.
18 And walking by the sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers, Simon
who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother, throwing a net into the
sea, for they were fishers.
19 And he said to them: Come after me, and I will make you fishers of
men.
20 And they immediately left their nets and followed him.
21 And going on thence, he saw other two brothers, James the son of
Zebedee, and John his brother, in the ship with Zebedee their father,
mending their nets; and he called them.
22 And immediately leaving the ship and their father, they followed
him.
23 And he went about in the whole of Galilee, teaching in their
synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and curing
every disease and every malady among the people.
24 And his fame went abroad into the whole of Syria; and they
brought to him all that were sick with various diseases, and that were
afflicted with torments, and those possessed with demons, and
lunatics, and paralytics; and he cured them.
25 And there followed him many multitudes from Galilee, and
Decapolis, and Jerusalem, and Judea, and from beyond the Jordan.
Matthew 5The H. T. Anderson New Testament
19
1 But seeing the multitudes, he went up into the mountain; and when
he had sat down, his disciples came to him;
2 and he opened his mouth and taught them, saying:
3 Blessed are the poor in spirit; for theirs is the kingdom of the
heavens.
4 Blessed are the meek; for they shall inherit the earth.
5 Blessed are they that mourn; for they shall be comforted.
6 Blessed are they that hunger and thirst for righteousness; for they
shall be filled.
7 Blessed are the merciful; for they shall receive mercy.
8 Blessed are the pure in heart; for they shall see God.
9 Blessed are the peacemakers; for they shall be called sons of God.
10 Blessed are they that are persecuted for righteousness’ sake; for
theirs is the kingdom of the heavens.
11 Blessed are you when they shall reproach you, and persecute you,
and say every evil thing against you falsely for my sake.
12 Rejoice, and be exceeding glad; for great is your reward in the
heavens; for so persecuted they the prophets that were before you.
13 You are the salt of the earth; but if the salt shall have become
tasteless, by what means shall it be salted? It is then good for nothing
but, after being cast out, to be trod upon by men.
14 You are the light of the world. A city that lies upon a mountain
cannot be hid:
15 neither do men light a lamp and put it under the measure, but on
the lampstand, and it gives light to all that are in the house.
16 So let your light shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father who is in the heavens.
17 Think not that I have come to destroy the law or the prophets: I
have not come to destroy, but to fulfill.
18 For verily I say to you, till heaven and earth pass away, one yod or
one point shall in no way pass from the law, till all be accomplished.
19 Whoever therefore shall make void one of the least of these
commandments, and shall teach men so, shall be called least in the
kingdom of the heavens; but whoever shall do and teach, he shall be
called great in the kingdom of the heavens,
20 For I say to you, that unless your righteousness shall be more
abundant than that of the scribes and Pharisees, you can by no
means enter into the kingdom of the heavens.
21 You have heard that it was said to the ancients: Thou shalt not kill;
and whoever shall kill shall be liable to the judgment.
22 But I say to you, that whoever is angry with his brother shall be
liable to the judgment; and whoever shall say to his brother.20
Codex Sinaiticus:
Worthless fellow, shall be liable to the Sanhedrim; but whoever shall
say: Thou fool, shall be liable to be cast into hellfire.
23 If therefore thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there remember
that thy brother has anything against thee,
24 leave there thy gift before the altar, and go, first be reconciled to
thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.
25 Agree with thy opponent-at-law quickly, while thou art on the
road with him, lest perhaps the opponent-at-law deliver thee to the
judge, and the judge to the officer, and thou be cast into prison.
26 Verily I say to thee, thou shalt not come out thence, till thou shalt
have paid the last farthing.
27 You have heard that it was said: Thou shalt not commit adultery.
28 But I say to you, That every one that looks on a woman to cherish
desire, has already committed adultery with her in his heart.
29 But if thy right eye ensnares thee, pull it out, and throw it from
thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members perish, and
not that thy whole body be thrown into hell.
30 And if thy right hand ensnares thee, cut it off, and throw it from
thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members perish, and
not that thy whole body go away into hell.
31 And it has been said: Whoever shall put away his wife, let him give
her a bill of divorce.
32 But I say to you, that whoever shalt put away his wife, unless on
account of lewdness, causes her to commit adultery; and whoever
shall marry her that is put away commits adultery.
33 Again: you have heard that it was said to the ancients: Thou shalt
not swear falsely, but shalt pay to the Lord thy oaths.
34 But I say to you, Swear not at all; neither by heaven, for it is the
throne of God;
35 nor by the earth, for it is his footstool; nor by Jerusalem, for it is
the city of the great King:
36 neither shalt thou swear by thy head, for thou canst not make one
hair white or black.
37 But let your word be yes, yes; no, no; and that which is more than
these is of the evil one.
38 You have heard that it was said: Eye for eye, and tooth for tooth.
39 But I say to you, that you resist not the injurious; but whoever
shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other also.
40 And to him that will go to law with thee, and take away thy coat,
give up thy mantle also.
41 And whoever will impress thee to go one mile, go with him two.
42 Give to him that asks of thee, and from him that would borrow of
thee, turn not away.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
21
43 You have heard that it was said: Thou shalt love thy neighbor, and
hate thy enemy.
44 But I say to you. Love your enemies, and pray for them that
persecute you;
45 that you may become sons of your Father who is in the heavens;
for he makes his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends his
rain on the just and the unjust.
46 For if you love them that love you, what reward have you? Do not
even the publicans the same?
47 And if you salute your brethren only, what do you more? Do not
even the heathen the same?
48 Be you therefore perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect.
Matthew 6
1 But take heed that you do not your righteousness before men, to be
seen by them: other wise you have no reward with your Father who is
in the heavens.
2 When therefore thou wouldst do a charitable deed, do not sound a
trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues, and in
the streets, that they may be glorified by men. Verily I say to you:
They have their reward in full.
3 But when thou doest a charitable deed, let not thy left hand know
what thy right hand does;
4 that thy charitable deed may be in secret; and thy Father who sees
in secret will reward thee.
5 And when you pray, you shall not be as the hypocrites; for they love
to pray standing in the synagogues, and in the corners of the streets,
that they may be seen by men. Verily I say to you: They have their
reward in full.
6 But thou, when thou prayest, go into thy closet; and having closed
thy door, pray to thy Father who is in secret; and thy Father who sees
in secret will reward thee.
7 But when you pray, use not vain repetitions as the heathens; for
they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking.
8 Be not therefore like them; for your Father knows what things you
have need of before you ask him.
9 In this way therefore pray you: Our Father who art in the heavens:
hallowed be thy name.
10 Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done as in heaven also on earth.
11 Give us this day our needful bread.
12 And forgive us our debts, as we also have forgiven our debtors;
13 and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.22
Codex Sinaiticus:
14 For if you forgive men their offenses, your heavenly Father will
also forgive you;
15 but if you for give not men, neither will your Father forgive your
offenses.
16 And when you fast, be not as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance;
for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear to men to fast.
Verily I say to you, They have their reward in full.
17 But do thou, when fasting, anoint thy head, and wash thy face,
18 that thou appear not to men to fast, but to thy Father who is in
secret; and thy Father who sees in secret will reward thee.
19 Lay not up for yourselves treasures on the earth, where moth and
rust consume, and where thieves break through and steal;
20 but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth
nor rust consumes, and where thieves do not break through nor steal.
21 For where thy treasure is, there will thy heart be also.
22 The lamp of the body is the eye. If thy eye be simple thy whole
body shall be full of light;
23 but if thy eye be evil thy whole body shall be full of darkness. If
then the light that is in thee is darkness, how great that darkness.
24 No one can serve two masters; for either he will hate the one and
love the other or he will hold to the one and despise the other. You
cannot serve God and Mammon.
25 For this reason I say to you: Be not anxious for your life what you
shall eat, nor for your body what you shall put on. Is not the life more
than the food, and the body than the clothing?
26 Look at the birds of heaven, that they sow not, neither do they
reap, nor gather into granaries; and yet your heavenly Father feeds
them: are you not much better than they?
27 But which of you, by being anxious, can add one cubit to his age?
28 And why are you anxious about clothing? Consider the lilies of the
field, how they grow: they toil not, nor do they spin.
29 But I say to you, that even Solomon in all his glory was not clothed
as one of these.
30 Now if God so clothes the herb of the field, which today is, and
tomorrow is thrown into the oven, will he not much more clothe you,
O you of little faith?
31 Then, be not anxious, saying: What shall we eat, or what shall we
drink, or with what shall we be clothed?
32 For after all these things do the Gentiles seek; for your heavenly
Father knows that you need all these.
33 But seek first his kingdom and righteousness, and all these shall
be given you in addition.
34 Be not therefore anxious for the morrow; for the morrow shall be
anxious for itself. Sufficient for the day is its own evil.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
23
Matthew 7
1 Judge not that you be not judged.
2 For with what judgment you judge, you shall be judged, and with
what measure you measure, it shall be measured to you.
3 And why beholdest thou the splinter that is in thy brother’s eye, but
considerest not the beam that is in thy own eye?
4 Or how wilt thou say to thy brother: Let me pull the splinter out of
thy eye, and behold, the beam is in thy own eye.
5 Hypocrite, pull first the beam out of thy own eye, and then thou
shalt see clearly to pull the splinter out of thy brother’s eye.
6 Give not that which is holy to dogs, neither throw your pearls
before swine, less they trample them with their feet, and turn and
tear you.
7 Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and you shall find: knock, and
it shall be opened to you.
8 For every one that asks receives; and he that seeks finds; and to
him that knocks it shall be opened.
9 Or what man is there of you, of whom should his son ask bread, will
he give him a stone?
10 or if he should also ask a fish, will he give him a serpent?
11 If then you being evil know how to give good gifts to your children,
how much more will your Father who is in the heavens give good
gifts to those who ask him?
12 All things therefore whatever you would that men should do to
you, even so do you to them; for this is the law and the prophets.
13 Enter in through the strait gate; for wide the gate and broad the
way that leads to destruction; and many are they that go in through
it;
14 for strait is the gate, and narrow the way that leads to life, and few
are they that find it.
15 Beware of false prophets, who come to you in sheep’s clothing, but
within are ravenous wolves.
16 By their fruits you shall know them. Do men gather grapes from
thorns, or figs from thistles?
17 So every good tree produces goodly fruit; but the corrupt tree
produces evil fruit.
18 A good tree cannot produce evil fruit; neither can a corrupt tree
produce goodly fruit.
19 Every tree that does not produce goodly fruit is cut down and
thrown into the fire.
20 Therefore, by their fruits you shall know them.24
Codex Sinaiticus:
21 Not every one that says to me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of the heavens, but he that does the will of my Father who is
in the heavens.
22 Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy
by thy name, and by thy name cast out demons, and by thy name do
many mighty works?
23 And then will I confess to them, I never knew you: depart from
me, you that work iniquity.
24 Every one therefore that hears these words of mine and does
them, shall be likened to a wise man, who built his house on the rock.
25 And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew,
and they beat upon that house, and it fell not; for it was founded on
the rock.
26 And every one that hears these words of mine, and does them not,
shall be likened to a foolish man who built his house upon the sand.
27 And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew,
and they beat upon that house, and it fell; and great was its fall.
28 And it came to pass when Jesus had finished these words, the
multitudes were astonished at his teaching;
29 for he taught them as having authority and not as their scribes.
Matthew 8
1 And when he had come down from the mountain, many multitudes
followed him.
2 And behold, a leper came and worshipped him, saying: Lord, if
thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.
3 And he stretched forth his hand and touched him, saying: I will, be
clean. And immediately his leprosy was cleansed.
4 And Jesus said to him: See that thou tell no one; but go, show
thyself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded, for a
testimony to them.
5 And when he had entered into Capernaum, there came to him a
centurion beseeching him,
6 and saying: Lord, my servant lies in my house palsied, fearfully
tormented.
7 He says to him: I will come and cure him.
8 But the centurion answering said: Lord, I am not worthy that thou
shouldest come under my roof; but speak only in a word, and my
servant shall be restored to health.
9 For I am a man under authority, having soldiers under me; and I
say to this one: Go, and he goes; and to another: Come, and he
comes; and to my servant: Do this, and he does it.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
25
10 And hearing it Jesus was filled with admiration, and said to those
that followed: Verily I say to you, not even in Israel have I found so
great faith.
11 But I say to you, that many shall come from the east and the west,
and shall recline at tables with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the
kingdom of the heavens;
12 but the sons of the kingdom shall go forth into the darkness that is
without: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
13 And Jesus said to the centurion: Go; as thou hast believed, be it
done for thee. And the servant was restored to health in that hour.
14 And Jesus came into the house of Peter, and saw his mother-in-
law lying and ill of a fever.
15 And he touched her hand, and the fever left her; and she arose and
ministered to him.
16 But when evening had come, they brought to him many possessed
with demons; and he cast out the spirits with a word, and cured all
that were sick,
17 that it might be fulfilled that was spoken through Isaiah the
prophet, saying: Himself took our infirmities and bore our diseases.
18 But Jesus seeing many multitudes about him, gave orders to
depart to the other side.
19 And a scribe came and said to him: Teacher, I will follow thee
wherever thou goest.
20 And Jesus said to him: The foxes have dens, and the birds of the
heaven have roosts, but the Son of man has not where he may lay his
head.
21 And another of his disciples said to him: Lord, permit me first to
go and bury my father.
22 But he said to him: Follow me, and let the dead bury their own
dead.
23 And after he had entered the ship, his disciples followed him.
24 And behold, a great tempest arose in the sea, so that the ship was
covered by the waves; but he was sleeping.
25 And they came and awoke him, saying: Lord, save, we perish.
26 And he says to them: Why are you fearful, O you of little faith?
Then he arose and rebuked the winds and the sea, and there was a
great calm.
27 And the men were astonished, saying: What manner of man is
this, that even the winds and the sea obey him?
28 And when he had come to the other side, into the country of the
Gadarenes, there met him two men possessed with demons, coming
out of the tombs, very fierce, so that no one could pass by that way.
29 And behold, they cried out, saying: What have we to do with thee,
Son of God? Hast thou come hither before the time, to torment us?26
Codex Sinaiticus:
30 And there was, at a distance from them, a herd of many swine
feeding.
31 And the demons besought him saying: If thou dost cast us out,
send us into the herd of swine.
32 And he said to them: Go. And they came out, and went away into
the swine; and behold, the whole herd rushed down the steep into
the sea, and died in the waters.
33 But those who fed them fled, and going away into the city told all
things, and what had happened to those possessed with the demons.
34 And behold, the whole city came out to meet Jesus; and seeing
him they besought that he would depart from their borders;
Matthew 9
1 And he entered a ship and passed over, and came into his own city.
2 And behold, they brought to him a palsied man lying on a bed. And
Jesus seeing their faith, said to the palsied man: Take courage, son,
thy sins are for given.
3 And behold, some of the scribes said within themselves: This man
blasphemes.
4 And Jesus perceiving their thoughts, said: Why think you evil in
your hearts?
5 For which is easier, to say: Thy sins are forgiven; or to say: Arise
and walk?
6 But that you may know that the Son of man on earth has authority
to forgive sins, then he says to the palsied man: Arise, take up thy
bed, and go to thy house.
7 And he arose and went away to his house.
8 And the multitudes saw and were afraid, and glorified God who
had given such authority to men.
9 And Jesus passing by thence saw a man, called Matthew, sitting at
the customhouse, and said to him: Follow me. And he arose and
followed him.
10 And it came to pass that, as he reclined at tables in the house,
behold, many publicans and sinners came and reclined at table with
Jesus and his disciples,
11 And the Pharisees seeing it said to his disciples: Why does your
teacher eat with the publicans and sinners?
12 But hearing it he said: Those who are in health have no need of a
physician, but those who are sick.
13 But go and learn what “I desire mercy and not sacrifice” means.
For I came not to call righteous men, but sinners.
14 Then came to him the disciples of John, saying: Why do we and
the Pharisees fast, but thy disciples fast not?The H. T. Anderson New Testament
27
15 And Jesus said to them: Can the sons of the bride chamber mourn
while the bride groom is with them? But days will come when the
bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then will they fast.
16 No one puts a piece of unfulled cloth on an old garment; for that
which fills it up takes from the garment, and a worse rent is made.
17 Neither do they put new wine into old bottles; otherwise, the
bottles break, and the wine runs out, and the bottles perish; but they
put new wine into new bottles, and both are preserved together.
18 While he was speaking these things to them, behold, a ruler came
in and worshipped him, saying: My daughter just now died; but come
and lay thy hand on her, and she shall live.
19 And Jesus arose and followed him, and so did his disciples.
20 And behold, a woman, that had had an issue of blood for twelve
years, came behind and touched the fringe of his mantle;
21 for she said within herself: If I may only touch his mantle, I shall
be saved.
22 But he turned and saw her and said: Daughter, take courage; thy
faith has saved thee. And the woman was saved from that hour.
23 And Jesus entered the house of the ruler and saw the pipers and
the multitude making a noise, and said:
24 Withdraw, for the maid is not dead, but sleeps. And they derided
him.
25 But when the multitude had been put out, he went in and took her
hand, and the maid arose.
26 And the fame of this went forth into that whole land.
27 And as Jesus was passing by thence, two blind men followed him,
crying out and saying: Have mercy on us, Son of David.
28 And after he had come into the house, the blind men came to him;
and Jesus said to them: Believe you that I am able to do this? They
said to him: Yes, Lord.
29 Then he touched their eyes, saying: According to your faith be it
done to you.
30 And their eyes were opened. And Jesus charged them in a
threatening manner, saying: See that no one know it.
31 But they went out and published him abroad in all that land.
32 But as they were going out, behold, they brought to him a man
dumb possessed with a demon.
33 And after the demon had been cast out, the dumb man spoke. And
the multitudes were astonished, saying: Never did it appear thus in
Israel.
34 But the Pharisees said: By the prince of the demons casts he out
the demons.28
Codex Sinaiticus:
35 And Jesus went about all the cities and the villages, teaching in
their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and
curing every disease and every infirmity.
36 But seeing the multitudes he was moved with pity for them,
because they were troubled and scattered as sheep that had no
shepherd.
37 Then said he to his disciples: The harvest indeed is great, but the
laborers few:
38 pray therefore the Lord of the harvest that he send forth laborers
into his harvest.
Matthew 10
1 And he called to him his twelve disciples, and gave them authority
over unclean spirits so that they could cast them out, and cure every
disease and every infirmity.
2 But the names of the twelve apostles are these: the first, Simon,
who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother; and James the son of
Zebedee, and John his brother;
3 Philip and Bartholomew, Thomas and Matthew the publican;
James the son of Alphaeus, and Lebbeus;
4 Simon the Canaanite, and Judas Iscariot who also delivered him
up.
5 These twelve Jesus sent forth after he had charged them, saying:
Into the road to the Gentiles go not, and into a city of the Samaritans
enter not;
6 but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
7 And as you go, preach saying: The kingdom of the heavens is at
hand.
8 Cure the sick, raise the dead, cleanse the lepers, cast out the
demons: freely you received, freely give.
9 Provide not gold, neither silver, nor brass in your girdles;
10 no bag for the journey, neither two coats, nor sandals, nor a staff;
for the laborer is worthy of his support.
11 Into whatever city or village you enter, inquire who in it is worthy;
and there abide till you go forth.
12 And when you enter a house, salute it.
13 And if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it; but if it
be not worthy, let your peace return to you.
14 And whoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when you
go out of that house or city, shake off the dust from your feet.
15 Verily, I say to you, it shall be more tolerable for the land of
Sodom and Gomorrah, in the day of judgment, than for that city.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
29
16 Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be come
therefore wise as serpents, and guileless as doves.
17 But beware of men; for they will deliver you up to councils, and in
their synagogues they will scourge you;
18 and before governors also and kings shall you be brought for my
sake, for a testimony to them and the Gentiles.
19 But when they deliver you up, be not anxious how or what you
shall speak; for there shall be given you in that hour what you shall
speak;
20 for you are not the speakers, but it is the Spirit of my Father that
speaks in you.
21 And brother shall deliver up brother to death, and the father the
child; and children shall rise up against parents and cause them to be
put to death.
22 And you shall be hated by all because of my name; but he that
endures to the end shall be saved.
23 But when they persecute you in this city, flee into the other for
verily I say to you, you shall not have made the circuit of the cities of
Israel, till the Son of man shall have come.
24 A disciple is not above the teacher, nor a servant above his lord.
25 It is enough for the disciple that he become as his teacher, and the
servant as his lord. If they have surnamed the master of the house
Beelzebub, how much more those of his household.
26 Be not then afraid of them; for nothing is concealed that shall not
be revealed, and hid that shall not be known.
27 What I tell you in darkness, speak in the light; and what you hear
in the ear, proclaim on the housetops.
28 And be not afraid of them that kill the body, but are not able to
kill the soul; but rather fear him who is able to destroy both soul and
body in hell.
29 Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? And yet not one of them
shall fall to the ground without your Father.
30 But even the hairs of your head are all numbered.
31 Fear not therefore: you are of more value than many sparrows.
32 Every one therefore that shall confess me before men, him will I
also confess before my Father who is in the heavens.
33 But whoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny
before my Father who is in the heavens.
34 Think not that I came to send peace on the earth, I came not to
send peace, but a sword.
35 For I came to set a man in opposition to his father, and a daughter
to her mother, and a daughter-in-law to her mother-in-law;
36 and a man’s enemies shall be those of his household.30
Codex Sinaiticus:
37 He that loves father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me,
and he that loves son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me;
38 and he that does not take his cross and follow after me, is not
worthy of me.
39 He that finds his life shall lose it, and he that loses his life for my
sake shall find it.
40 He that receives you receives me, and he that receives me receives
him that sent me.
41 He that receives a prophet because he is a prophet, shall receive a
prophet’s reward; and he that receives a righteous man because he is
a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man’s reward.
42 And whoever shall give one of these little ones only a cup of cold
water to drink, because he is a disciple, verily I say to you, he shall
not lose his reward.
Matthew 11
1 And it came to pass when Jesus had made an end of commanding
his twelve disciples, he departed thence to teach and to preach in
their cities.
2 But John, having heard in prison of the works of Christ, sent by his
disciples,
3 and said to him: Art thou he that comes, or look we for another?
4 And answering. Jesus said to them: Go and tell John what things
you hear and see;
5 the blind receive sight and the lame walk, lepers are cleansed and
the deaf hear, and the dead are raised, and the poor have the gospel
preached to them;
6 and blessed is he whoever shall not be offended at me.
7 But as these were going away, Jesus began to say to the multitudes
concerning John: What went you out into the wilderness to see? a
reed shaken by the wind?
8 But what went you out to see? a man clothed ill soft raiment?
Behold, they that wear soft clothing are in kings’ houses.
9 But why did you go out? To see a prophet? Yes, I say to you, and
more than a prophet.
10 This is he of whom it is written: Behold, I send my messenger
before thy face, who shall prepare thy way before thee.
11 Verily I say to you, among those born of women there has not
arisen a greater than John the Baptist; but the least in the kingdom
of the heavens is greater than he.
12 But from the days of John the Baptist till now, the kingdom of the
heavens is taken by force, and men of force seize upon it eagerly.
13 For all the prophets and the law prophesied till John;The H. T. Anderson New Testament
31
14 and if you will receive it, he is Elijah that was to come.
15 He that has ears, let him hear.
16 But to what shall I liken this generation? It is like children sit ting
in the markets, who call to the others,
17 and say: We piped to you, and you did not dance: we wailed, and
you did not lament.
18 For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say: He has a
demon.
19 The Son of man has come eating and drinking, and they say:
Behold, a man, a glutton and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and
sinners. And yet Wisdom is justified by her works.
20 Then he began to upbraid the cities in which most of his mighty
works had been done, because they repented not.
21 Alas for thee, Chorazin; Alas for thee, Bethsaida; for if the mighty
works which have been done in you, had been done in Tyre and
Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
22 Further more I say to you, it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and
Sidon in the day of judgment than for you.
23 And thou, Capernaum, shalt thou be exalted to heaven? Thou
shalt be brought down to Hades; for if the mighty works which have
been done in thee had been done in Sodom, it would have remained
to this day.
24 Furthermore I say to you, It shall be more tolerable for the land of
Sodom in the day of judgment than for thee.
25 At that time Jesus answered and said: I thank thee. Father, Lord
of heaven and of earth, that thou hart hid these things from the wise
and prudent, and hast revealed them to babes:
26 yes, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight.
27 All things have been delivered to me by my Father; and no one
knows the Son but the Father: neither knows any one the Father but
the Son, and he to whomever the Son will reveal him.
28 Come to me, all you that labor and are heavily burdened, and I
will give you rest.
29 Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly
in heart, and you shall find rest for your souls.
30 For my yoke is good, and my burden is light.
Matthew 12
1 At that time Jesus went, on the sabbath, through the fields of grain:
and his disciples were hungry, and they began to pull the ears of
grain and to eat.
2 And the Pharisees seeing it said to him: Behold, thy disciples are
doing what it is not lawful to do on the sabbath.32
Codex Sinaiticus:
3 But he said to them: Have you not read what David did, when he
was hungry, and they that were with him?
4 how he entered the house of God, and ate of the loaves of the
presence, which it was not lawful for him to eat, nor for those who
were with him, but for the priests only?
5 or have you not read in the law, that on the sabbath days the priests
in the temple profane the sabbath, and are blameless?
6 But I say to you, that something greater than the temple is here.
7 And if you had known what “I desire mercy and not sacrifice”
means, you would not have condemned the blameless.
8 For the Son of man is Lord of the sabbath.
9 And he departed thence, and came into their synagogue.
10 And behold, a man had a withered hand; and they asked him,
saying: Is it lawful to cure on the sabbath? that they might accuse
him.
11 But he said to them: What man shall there be of you, who shall
have one sheep; and if this fall into a pit on the sabbath, will he not
lay hold on it, and lift it up?
12 How much better then, a man is than a sheep: so then it is lawful
to do well on the sabbath.
13 Then he says to the man: Stretch forth thy hand. And he stretched
it forth; and it was restored to soundness as the other.
14 But the Pharisees went out and took counsel against him, that they
might destroy him.
15 But Jesus perceived it and withdrew thence. And many folk
followed him, and he cured them all,
16 and charged them that they should not make him known,
17 that it might be fulfilled that was spoken through Isaiah the
prophet, saying:
18 Behold my servant whom I have chosen, my beloved, in whom my
soul is well pleased: I will put my Spirit upon him, and he shall
declare judgment to the Gentiles.
19 He shall not contend nor cry out, neither shall any one hear his
voice in the streets.
20 A bruised reed shall he not break, and a smoking wick shall he not
extinguish, till he send forth judgment to victory.
21 And in his name shall nations trust.
22 Then was brought to him a demoniac blind and dumb; and he
cured him so that the dumb man spoke and saw.
23 And all the multitudes were astonished and said: Is this the Son of
David?
24 But the Pharisees hearing it said: This man does not cast out the
demons but by Beelzebub the prince of the demons.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
33
25 And knowing their thoughts he said to them: Every kingdom
divided against itself is made desolate; and no city or house divided
against itself shall stand.
26 And if Satan casts out Satan, he is divided against himself: how
then shall his kingdom stand?
27 And if I by Beelzebub cast out the demons, by whom do your sons
cast them out? For this reason they shall be your judges.
28 But if I by the Spirit of God cast out the demons, then has the
kingdom of God already come upon you.
29 Or how can any one enter the house of the strong man and seize
on his instruments, unless he first bind the strong man, and then he
will plunder his house?
30 He that is not with me is against me, and he that gathers not with
me scatters.
31 For this reason I say to you: Every sin and blasphemy shall be
forgiven men, but the blasphemy of the Spirit shall not be forgiven.
32 And who ever shall speak a word against the Son of man, it shall
be forgiven him; but whoever shall speak against the Holy Spirit, it
shall not be forgiven him, neither in this age, nor in that to come.
33 Either make the tree goodly and its fruit goodly, or make the tree
corrupt and its fruit corrupt; for by the fruit the tree is known.
34 Brood of vipers, how can you being evil speak good things? For
out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.
35 The good man out of his good ; treasure brings forth good things;
and the evil man out of his evil treasure brings forth evil things.
36 But I say to you, that every idle word that men shall speak, they
shall give an account of it in the day of judgment.
37 For by thy words thou shalt be justified and by thy words thou
shalt be condemned.
38 Then answered him some of the scribes and Pharisees, saying:
Teacher, we wish to see a sign from thee.
39 But he answered and saidto them: A wicked and adulterous
generation seeks for a sign and no sign shall be given it but the sign
of Jonah the prophet.
40 For as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of the
great fish so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in
the heart of the earth.
41 The men of Nineveh shall rise up in the judgment with this
generation, and shall condemn it, because they repented at the
preaching of Jonah; and lo, something, greater than Jonah is here.
42 The queen of the south shall rise in the judgment with this
generation, and shall condemn it, because she came from the most
distant parts of the earth, to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and lo,
something greater than Solomon is here.34
Codex Sinaiticus:
43 When the unclean spirit has gone out from the man, he goes
through dry places seeking rest, and finds none.
44 Then he says: I will return into my house whence I came. And he
comes and finds it unoccupied, and swept, and adorned.
45 Then he goes and takes with him seven other spirits more wicked
than himself, and they enter in and dwell there; and the last state of
that man becomes worse than the first. So shall it be also with this
wicked generation.
46 While he was yet speaking to the multitudes, behold, his mother
and his brothers stood without seeking to speak to him.
47 And some one said to him: Behold, thy mother and thy brothers
stand with out, seeking to speak to thee.
48 But he answered and said to him that told him: Who is my
mother, and who are my brothers?
49 And stretching forth his hand over his disciples, he said: Behold
my mother and my brothers;
50 for whoever shall have done the will of my Father who is in the
heavens, this is my brother, and sister, and mother.
Matthew 13
1 In that day Jesus went out of the house, and sat by the sea.
2 And many multitudes came together to him so that he entered a
ship and sat down, and the whole multitude stood on the shore.
3 And he spoke many things to them in parables, saying: Behold, the
sower went forth to sow.
4 And, as he sowed, some fell by the way, and the birds came and ate
them up.
5 But others fell on rocky places where they had not much earth; and
they immediately sprung up because they had no depth of earth;
6 but when the sun had risen, they I were scorched, and because they
had no root they withered.
7 But others fell on thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked them.
8 But others I fell on good ground, and brought forth fruit, one a
hundredfold, one sixty, one thirty.
9 He that has ears, let him hear.
10 And the disciples came and said to him: Why speakest thou to
them in parables?
11 And he answered and said: Because to you it is given to know the
mysteries of the kingdom of the heavens, but to them it is not given.
12 For whoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have
abundance; but whoever has not, even that which he has shall be
taken from him.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
35
13 For this reason I speak to them in parables, because when seeing
they see not, and when hearing they hear not, neither do they
understand.
14 And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah which says: By
hearing you shall hear, and shall not understand, and seeing you
shall see, and shall not perceive.
15 For the heart of this people has become fat, and with their ears
they hear heavily, and their eyes they have closed, lest perhaps they
should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears and understand
with their heart, and turn, and I should restore them to health.
16 But blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they
hear.
17 Verily I say to you: Many prophets and righteous men desired to
see what you see, and saw not, and to hear what you hear, and heard
not.
18 Hear you then the parable of him that sowed.
19 When any one hears the word of the kingdom, and understands it
not, the wicked one comes and snatches away that which is sown in
his heart. This is he that was sown by the way.
20 But he that was sown on the rocky places is he that hears the
word, and immediately with joy receives it;
21 yet he has no root in himself, but endures for a while; and when
affliction or persecution arises because of the word, he immediately
takes offense.
22 But he that was sown among thorns is he that hears the word, and
the care of the age and the deceitfulness of riches choke the word,
and he becomes unfruitful.
23 But he that was sown on good ground, is he that hears the word
and understands it, who also bears fruit, and produces, one a
hundred fold, one sixty, one thirty.
24 Another parable laid he before them, saying: The kingdom of the
heavens is likened to a man that sowed good seed in his field.
25 But while the men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares over in
the midst of the wheat and went away.
26 But when the blade sprung up and produced fruit, then appeared
the tares also.
27 And the servants of the master of the house came and said to him;
Sir, didst thou not sow good seed in thy field? Whence then has it
tares?
28 He said to them: An enemy did this. And the servants say to him:
Wilt thou then that we go and gather them up?
29 But he said: No, lest perhaps while gathering the tares you root up
the wheat together with them.36
Codex Sinaiticus:
30 Let both grow together till the harvest, and in time of harvest I
will say to the reapers: Gather first the tares, and bind them into
bundles to burn them; but gather the wheat into my granary.
31 Another parable laid he before them, saying: The kingdom of the
heavens is like a grain of mustard, which a man took and sowed in
his field:
32 which indeed is less than all the seeds; but when it has grown, is
greater than the garden plants, and becomes a tree, so that the birds
of heaven come and roost in its branches.
33 Another parable spoke he to them: The kingdom of the heavens is
like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of flour,
till the whole was leavened.
34 All these things spoke Jesus to the multitudes in parables, and
without a parable spoke he nothing to them,
35 that it might be fulfilled that was spoken through the prophet
Isaiah, saying: I will open my mouth in parables, I will utter things
concealed from the foundation.
36 Then dismissing the multitudes he came into the house. And his
disciples came to him, saying: Explain to us the parable of the tares
of the field.
37 And he answered and said: He that sows the good seed is the Son
of man:
38 the field is the world: the good seed, these are the sons of the
kingdom; but the tares are the sons of the wicked one:
39 the enemy that sowed them is the devil: the harvest is the
conclusion of the age, and the reapers are angels.
40 As then the tares are collected and burned in fire, so shall it be in
the conclusion of the age.
41 The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather
out of his kingdom all things that cause offense, and them that do
iniquity,
42 and shall cast them into the furnace of fire: there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth.
43 Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of
their Father. He that has ears, let him hear.
44 The kingdom of the heavens is like treasure hid in the field, which
a man found and hid, and for joy over it he went and sold all that he
had, and bought that field.
45 Again: the kingdom of the heavens is like a man, a merchant
seeking goodly pearls:
46 when he had found one pearl of great value, he went and sold all
that he had and bought it.
47 Again: the kingdom of the heavens is like a net that was cast into
the sea and gathered of every kind:The H. T. Anderson New Testament
37
48 which, when it was full, they drew to the shore, and sitting down
they gathered the good into baskets, but threw the bad away.
49 So shall it be in the conclusion of the age: the angels shall come
forth, and separate the wicked from among the righteous,
50 and shall cast them into the furnace of fire: there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth.
51 Have you understood all these things? They say to him, Yes.
52 And he said to them: Therefore, every scribe instructed in the
kingdom of the heavens is like a man, a master of a house, who
brings forth out of his treasury things new and old.
53 And it came to pass, when Jesus had made an end of these
parables, he departed thence.
54 And he came into his own country, and taught them in their
synagogue, so that they were astonished and said: Whence has this
man this wisdom and the mighty works?
55 Is not this the son of the carpenter? Is not his mother called Mary,
and his brothers, James, and Joseph, and Simon, and Judah?
56 And his sisters, are they not all with us? Whence then has this
man all these things?
57 And they were offended at him. But Jesus said to them, A prophet
is not without honor unless in his own country and in his own house.
58 And he did not many mighty works there because of their
unbelief.
Matthew 14
1 At that time Herod the tetrarch heard of the fame of Jesus,
2 and said to his servants: This is John the Baptist: he has risen from
the dead, and for this reason the powers are active within him.
3 For Herod having taken John, had bound him, and put him away in
prison, because of Herodias the wife of Philip his brother.
4 For John said to him: It is not lawful for thee to have her.
5 And intending to kill him, he was afraid of the multitude, because
they held him as a prophet.
6 But when Herod’s birthday was kept, the daughter of Herodias
danced in the midst and pleased Herod:
7 wherefore he promised with an oath to give her whatever she would
ask.
8 And she having been before instigated by her mother, said: Give
me here in a dish the head of John the Baptist.
9 And the king though grieved, be cause of the oaths and the guests
commanded it to be given,
10 and sent and beheaded John in the prison.38
Codex Sinaiticus:
11 And his head was brought in a dish and given to the maiden; and
she carried it to her mother.
12 And his disciples came and took away the corpse and buried it,
and came and told Jesus.
13 And when Jesus heard it, he withdrew thence in a ship to a desert
place apart; and the multitudes hearing it followed him on foot from
the cities.
14 And he came forth and saw a great multitude, and was moved with
pity for them and cured their sick.
15 But when evening had come, the disciples came to him, saying:
The place is desert, and the hour has already passed: therefore send
the multitudes away, that they may go into the villages and buy
themselves food.
16 But he said to them: They have no need to go away; do you give
them to eat.
17 And they say to him: We have here nothing but five loaves and two
fishes.
18 And he said: Bring them hither to me.
19 And after commanding the multitudes to recline on the grass, he
took the five loaves and the two fishes, and having looked up to
heaven he blessed, and broke, and gave the bread to the disciples,
and the disciples gave it to the multitudes.
20 And all ate and were filled; and they took up what remained of the
broken pieces twelve traveling baskets full.
21 And those who had eaten were about five thousand men besides
women and children.
22 And he compelled the disciples to enter the ship, and go before
him to the other side, till he should send the multitudes away.
23 And having sent the multitudes away, he went up into the
mountain apart to pray. And when evening had come he was there
alone.
24 But the ship now in the midst of the sea was tossed by the waves;
for the wind was against it.
25 And at the fourth watch of the night, he came to them walking
over the sea.
26 And seeing him walking on the sea, they were troubled, saying: It
is a specter; and they cried out for fear.
27 But he immediately spoke to them, saying: Take courage, it is I: be
not afraid.
28 And Peter answered him and said: Lord, if it is thou, command
me to come to thee over the waters.
29 And he said: Come. And going down from the ship Peter walked
over the waters, and came to Jesus.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
39
30 But seeing the wind he was afraid; and beginning to sink he cried
out, saying: Lord, save me.
31 And Jesus immediately stretched forth his hand, and took hold of
him, and said to him: O thou of little faith, why didst thou doubt?
32 And after they had come up into the ship the wind ceased.
33 And those in the ship worshipped him, saying: Truly thou art the
Son of God.
34 And they passed over and came to the land of Gennesaret.
35 And when they had knowledge of him, the men of that place sent
into that whole region round about, and brought to him all that were
sick;
36 and they besought him that they might only touch the fringe of his
mantle; and as many as touched were thoroughly restored to health.
Matthew 15
1 Then came to Jesus Pharisees and scribes from Jerusalem, saying:
2 Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders? for they
wash not their hands when they eat bread.
3 But answering he said to them: Why do you also transgress the
commandment of God because of your tradition?
4 For God commanded, saying: Honor thy father and thy mother;
and he that curses father or mother let him surely die;
5 but you say: Whoever shall say to his father or his mother: That, by
whatever thou mightest receive aid from me, is a gift, he shall no
more honor his father or his mother.
6 And you have made the law of God of no effect because of your
traditions.
7 Hypocrites, well did Isaiah prophesy of you, saying: This people
honors me with their lips, but their heart is far distant from me.
9 But in vain do they show devotion to me, teaching teachings the
commandments of men.
10 And calling the multitude to him he said to them: Hear and
understand;
11 not that which enters the mouth defiles the man; but that which
comes forth out of the mouth, this defiles the man.
12 Then came the disciples and said to him: Knowest thou that the
Pharisees, when they heard the saying, were offended?
13 But he answered and said: Every plant that my heavenly Father
has not planted shall be rooted up.
14 Let them alone; they are blind leaders of the blind; and if a blind
man lead a blind man, both shall fall into the pit.
15 But Peter answered and said to him: Explain to us the parable.
16 And he said; Are you also yet without understanding?40
Codex Sinaiticus:
17 Do you not perceive that every thing that enters the mouth goes
into the belly, and is cast out into the sink?
18 But the things that come forth from the mouth proceed from the
heart; and these defile the man.
19 For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
lewdness, thefts, false testimonies, blasphemies.
20 These are the things that defile the man; but to eat with unwashed
hands defiles not the man.
21 And Jesus went out thence and withdrew into the regions of Tyre
and Sidon.
22 And behold, a woman of Canaan came forth from those borders
and cried out, saying: Have mercy on me. Lord, Son of David: my
daughter is grievously afflicted by a demon.
23 But he answered her not a word. And his disciples came and
besought him, saying: Dismiss her, for she cries after us.
24 But he answered and said: I have not been sent but to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel.
25 And she came and worshipped him, saying: Lord, help me.
26 But he answered and said: It is not right to take the children’s
bread and throw it to the little dogs.
27 And she said: Yes, Lord: and yet thou canst help me; for the little
dogs eat of the crumbs that fall from their masters’ table.
28 Then Jesus answered and said to her: O woman, great is thy faith:
be it done for thee as thou wilt. And her daughter was restored to
health from that hour.
29 And having departed thence Jesus came by the sea of Galilee; and
going up into the mountain he sat there,
30 And there came to him many multitudes, having with them the
lame, blind, dumb, maimed, and many others; and they threw them
down at his feet; and he cured them,
31 so that the multitude was astonished when they saw the dumb
speaking, the maimed whole, and the lame walking, and the blind
seeing; and they glorified the God of Israel.
32 But Jesus called to him his disciples and said: I have pity on the
multitude, because they have continued with me now three days, and
have nothing to eat; and I am not willing to send them away fasting,
lest perhaps they faint on the road.
33 And the disciples said to him: Whence have we in the desert as
many loaves as can fill so great a multitude?
34 And Jesus said to them: How many loaves have you? They said:
Seven, and a few little fishes.
35 And having commanded; the multitude to recline on the ground,The H. T. Anderson New Testament
41
36 he took the seven loaves and the fishes, and after giving thanks he
broke, and gave to the disciples, and the disciples gave them to the
multitudes.
37 And all ate and were filled; and they took up what remained of the
broken pieces, seven provision baskets full.
38 And they that had eaten were four thousand men besides children
and women.
39 And he sent the multitudes away, and entered the ship, and came
into the borders of Magadan.
Matthew 16
1 And the Pharisees and Sadducees came, and tempting, asked him to
show them a sign from heaven.
2 But he answered and said to them:
3 [no verse]
4 A wicked and adulterous generation seeks for a sign, and no sign
shall be given it but the sign of Jonah. And he left them and
departed.
5 And the disciples having come to the other side had forgotten to
take bread.
6 And Jesus said to them: Take heed and beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees and Sadducees.
7 And they reasoned among themselves, saying: Because we took no
bread.
8 But Jesus perceiving it, said: Why reason among yourselves, O you
of little faith, because you took no bread?
9 Do you not yet understand, and do you not remember the five
loaves of the five thousand, and how many traveling baskets you took
up?
10 nor the seven loaves of the four thousand, and how many
provision baskets you took up?
11 How is it that you do not understand that I spoke not to you of
bread? But beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
12 Then they understood that he did not bid them beware of the
leaven of the Pharisees and the Sadducees, but of the teaching of the
Pharisees and Sadducees.
13 And when Jesus had come into the regions of Caesarea Philippi,
he asked his disciples, saying: Who do men say that the Son of man
is?
14 They said: Some, John the Baptist, but others, Elijah, and yet
others, Jeremiah, or one of the prophets.
15 He says to them: But who say you that I am?42
Codex Sinaiticus:
16 And Simon Peter answering said: Thou art the Christ, the Son of
the living God.
17 And Jesus answering said to him: Blessed art thou, Simon son of
Jonah, for flesh and blood did not reveal it to thee, but my Father
who is in the heavens.
18 And I also say to thee, that thou art Peter, and on this rock I will
build my church, and the gates of Hades shall not prevail against it.
19 I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of the heavens, and
whatever thou shalt bind on earth, shall be bound in the heavens;
and whatever thou shalt loose on earth, shall be loosed in the
heavens.
20 Then he charged the disciples to tell no one that he was the Christ.
21 From that time Jesus began to show to his disciples, that he must
go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things from the elders, and chief
priests, and scribes, and be killed, and rise on the third day.
22 And Peter took him and began to rebuke him, saying: Be it far
from thee, Lord: this shall not be to thee.
23 But he turned and said to Peter: Get behind me, Satan: thou art
my stumbling block, for thou thinkest not the things of God, but the
things of men.
24 Then Jesus said to his disciples: If any one will come after me, let
him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.
25 For whoever will save his life shall lose it; but whoever shall have
lost his life for my sake shall find it.
26 For what shall it profit a man, if he shall have gained the whole
world, but yet shall have lost his life? Or what will a man give as a
ransom for his life?
27 For the Son of man will come in the glory of his Father with his
angels, and then will he reward each one according to his work.
28 Verily I say to you: There are some of those standing here, who
shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his
kingdom.
Matthew 17
1 And after six days Jesus takes with him Peter and James and John
his brother, and leads them up into a high mountain apart.
2 And he was transfigured before them; and his face shone as the
sun, and his garments became white as light.
3 And behold, there appeared to them Moses and Elijah talking with
him.
4 And Peter answered and said to Jesus: Lord, it is good that we are
here; if thou wiltest I will make here three tents, one for thee, and
one for Moses, and one for Elijah.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
43
5 While he was yet speaking, behold, a cloud of light overshadowed
them; and lo, a voice from the cloud saying: This is my beloved Son
in whom I am well pleased: hear him.
6 And hearing it the disciples fell on their face and were greatly
afraid.
7 And Jesus came forward, and touching them said: Arise and be not
afraid.
8 But when they had lifted up their eyes they saw no one but Jesus
only.
9 And as they came down from the mountain, Jesus charged them,
saying: Tell the vision to no one till the Son of man shall have risen
from the dead.
10 And the disciples asked him, saying: Why then do the scribes say
that Elijah must first come?
11 He answered and said: Elijah indeed comes; and he will restore all
things.
12 But I say to you, that Elijah has already come, and they knew him
not, but did to him what they pleased. So also shall the Son of man
suffer by them.
13 Then the disciples understood that he spoke to them of John the
Baptist.
14 And when they came to the multitude, there came to him a man
kneeling to him,
15 and saying, Lord, have mercy on my son, for he is a lunatic, and
suffers grievously; for he often falls into the fire and often into the
water.
16 And I brought him to thy disciples and they were not able to cure
him.
17 And Jesus answered and said, O generation unbelieving and
perverse, how long shall I be with you? How long shall I bear with
you; Bring him hither to me.
18 And Jesus rebuked him, and the demon came out of him, and the
child was cured from that hour.
19 Then the disciples came to Jesus privately and said: Why were we
not able to cast it out?
20 He said to them: Because of your little faith; for verily I say to you,
if you have faith as a grain of mustard, you shall say to this
mountain: Be removed hence to that place, and it shall remove, and
nothing shall be impossible for you.
21 [no verse]
22 And while they abode in Galilee, Jesus said to them: The Son of
man shall be delivered into the hands of men,
23 and they shall kill him, and on the third day he shall arise. And
they were very sad.44
Codex Sinaiticus:
24 And when they came into Capernaum, they that collected the
didrachma came to Peter and said: Does your teacher pay the
didrachma?
25 He said: Yes. And after he had come into the house, Jesus
anticipated him, saying: What think you, Simon? From whom do the
kings of the earth collect tribute or custom? From their own sons, or
from those of others?
26 And when he had said: From those of others; Jesus said to him:
Then are the sons free.
27 But that we may not offend them, go to the sea, and throw in a
hook, and take the fish that first comes up; and when thou hast
opened his mouth, thou shalt find a stater: take that and give it to
them for me and thee.
Matthew 18
1 In that hour the disciples came to Jesus, saying: Who then is
greatest in the kingdom of the heavens?
2 And calling a little child to him, he placed it in the midst of them,
3 and said: Verily I say to you, unless you turn and become as little
children, you shall in no way enter into the kingdom of the heavens.
4 Whoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, he is
greatest in the kingdom of the heavens.
5 And whoever shall receive one such little child in my name, receives
me.
6 But whoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe in me,
it were better for him that an upper millstone were hung about his
neck and he were drowned in the depth of the sea.
7 Alas for the world because of offenses; for it is necessary that
offenses come, yet alas for the man through whom the offense comes.
8 But if thy hand or thy foot offends thee, cut it off and throw it from
thee: it is better for thee to enter into life maimed or lame, than
having two hands or two feet to be cast into the eternal fire.
9 And if thy eye offends thee, pull it out and throw it from thee: it is
better for thee to enter into life with one eye, than having two eyes to
be cast into hell fire.
10 Take heed that you despise not one of these little ones; for I say to
you, that their angels in the heavens do always behold the face of my
Father who is in the heavens.
11 For the Son of man has come to save that which is lost.
12 What think you? If any man have a hundred sheep, and one of
them go astray, does he not leave the ninety-nine on the mountains,
and go and seek for that which went astray?
13 And if it happen that he find it, verily I say to you, that he rejoices
over it more than over the ninety-nine that went not astray.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
45
14 So it is not the will of your Father who is in the heavens that one of
these little ones perish.
15 And if thy brother sin, go, tell him of his fault between thee and
him alone; if he hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother.
16 But if he hear thee not, take with thee one or two more, that by the
mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established.
17 But if he refuses to hear them, tell it to the church; and if he refuse
to hear the church also, let him be to thee as a heathen and a
publican.
18 Verily I say to you, whatever you shall bind on earth shall be
bound in heaven; and whatever you shall loose on earth shall be
loosed in heaven.
19 Again, I say to you that if two of you on earth shall agree
concerning any thing what ever they will ask, it shall be done for
them by my Father who is in the heavens.
20 For where there are two or three that have come together for my
name, there am I in the midst of them.
21 Then came Peter and said to him: Lord, how often shall my
brother sin against me and I forgive him? Till seven times?
22 Jesus says to him: I say not to thee, till seven times, but till
seventy times seven.
23 For this reason the kingdom of the heavens is likened to a man, a
king, who wished to take up a settlement with his servants.
24 And when he had begun to settle, there was brought to him one
that owed him ten thousand talents.
25 And as he was not able to pay, the lord commanded him to be
sold, and his wife, and his children, and all that he had, and payment
to be made.
26 Falling down therefore, that servant worshipped him, saying:
Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all.
27 And the lord of that servant moved with pity loosed him, and
forgave him the debt.
28 But that servant went out and found one of his fellow servants
that owed him a hundred denarii; and laying hold on him he took
him by the throat, saying: Pay, if thou owest any thing.
29 Falling down therefore, his fellow servant besought him, saying:
Have patience with me, and I will pay thee.
30 But he would not; but went and threw him into prison till he
should pay the debt.
31 Therefore his fellow servants seeing what had been done, were
greatly grieved, and came and made known to their lord all that had
been done.
32 Then his lord called him and said to him: Wicked servant, all that
debt I forgave thee, because thou didst entreat me:46
Codex Sinaiticus:
33 did it not behoove thee also to have mercy onthy fellow servant, as
I also had mercy on thee?
34 And being angryhis lord delivered him to the tormentors, till he
should pay all that was due him.
35 So also will my heavenly Father do to you, if you from your hearts
forgive not each one his brother.
Matthew 19
1 And it came to pass when Jesus had finished these words, he
departed from Galilee and came into the borders of Judea beyond the
Jordan.
2 And many multitudes followed him, and he cured them there.
3 And the Pharisees came to him, tempting him and saying: Is it
lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause?
4 And he answered and said: Have you not read that the Creator at
the beginning made them male and female?
5 and said: For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and
be joined to his wife, and the two shall be one flesh.
6 So then no longer are they two, but one flesh. What therefore God
has joined together, let not man put asunder.
7 They say to him: Why then did Moses command to give a bill of
divorce and put her away?
8 He said to them: Moses because of the hardness of your heart
permitted you to put away your wives; but from the beginning it was
not so.
9 But I say to you: Whoever puts away his wife unless for lewdness,
and marries another, commits adultery.
10 The disciples say to him: If such is the case of the man with the
wife, it is not good to marry.
11 But he said to them: All cannot receive this saying, but those to
whom it is given.
12 For there are eunuchs who were born so from their mother’s
womb; and there are eunuchs who were made eunuchs by men; and
there are eunuchs who have made themselves eunuchs for the sake of
the kingdom of the heavens. He that is able to receive it, let him
receive it.
13 Then were brought to him little children, that he might lay his
hands on them and pray; but the disciples rebuked them.
14 But Jesus said to them: Let the little children alone and forbid
them not to come to me; for to such belongs the kingdom of the
heavens.
15 And he laid his hands on them, and departed thence.
16 And behold, one came to him and said: Teacher, what good thing
shall I do that I may have eternal life?The H. T. Anderson New Testament
47
17 And he said to him: Why dost thou ask me about the good? One is
good. But if thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments.
18 Which said he. And Jesus said: Thou shalt not kill, thou shalt not
commit adultery, thou shalt not steal, thou shalt not bear false
testimony.
19 honor thy father and thy mother, and, thou shalt love thy neighbor
as thyself.
20 The young man says to him: All these have I kept; what lack I yet?
21 Jesus said to him: If thou wilt be perfect, go sell thy goods, and
give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven, and come
follow me.
22 And hearing it, the young man went away grieved; for he had
great possessions.
23 And Jesus said to his disciples: Verily I say to you, that a rich man
will with difficulty enter into the kingdom of the heavens.
24 But again I say to you that it is easier for a camel to enter in
through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of the heavens.
25 And the disciples hearing it were greatly astonished, saying: Who
then can be saved?
26 But Jesus looked on them and said to them: With men this is
impossible, but with God all things are possible.
27 Then Peter answered and said to him: Behold, we have left all and
followed thee: what therefore shall we have?
28 And Jesus said to them: Verily I say to you that you who have
followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of man shall sit on the
throne of his glory, you yourselves also shall sit on twelve thrones
judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
29 And every one that has left brothers, or sisters, or father, or
mother, or children, or lands, or houses, for the sake of my name,
shall receive many times more and shall inherit eternal life.
30 But many first shall be last and last first.
Matthew 20
1 For the kingdom of the heavens is like a man a master of a house,
who went out early in the morning to hire laborers into his vineyard.
2 And when he had agreed with the laborers for a denarius a day, he
sent them into his vineyard.
3 And he went out about the third hour, and saw others standing in
the market idle,
4 and he said to them: Go you also into the vineyard, and whatever
may be right I will give you.
5 And they went. And again he went out about the sixth and ninth
hour, and did in like manner.48
Codex Sinaiticus:
6 And about the eleventh hour he went out and found others
standing, and said to them: Why do you stand here all the day idle?
7 They said to him: Because no one has hired us. He said to them: Go
you also into the vineyard.
8 And when evening had come the lord of the vineyard said to his
steward: Call the laborers, and pay the hire, beginning from the last
even to the first.
9 And when those came who had been hired about the eleventh hour,
they received each one a denarius.
10 But when those came who had been hired first, they thought that
they should receive more; and they also received each one a denarius.
11 But when they received it they murmured against the master of the
house,
12 saying: These the last worked one hour, and thou hast made them
equal to us who bore the burden of the day, and the heat.
13 But he answered one of them and said: Friend, I do thee no
wrong: didst thou not agree with I me for a denarius?
14 Take that which is thine and go. But I will give to this the last even
as to thee:
15 is it not allowed me to do what I will with my own? or is thy eye
evil because I am good?
16 So the last shall be first, and the first last.
17 And as Jesus went up to Jerusalem, he took the twelve aside
privately, and on the way said to them:
18 Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be
delivered to the chief priests and scribes, and they will condemn him
to death.
19 And they will deliver him to the Gentiles, to mock, and to scourge,
and to crucify; and on the third day he shall rise.
20 Then came to him the mother of the sons of Zebedee with her
sons, worshipping and asking something of him.
21 And he said to her: What wilt thou? She says to him: Command
that these two sons of mine may sit, one on thy right hand and one
on thy left in thy kingdom.
22 But Jesus answered and said: You know not what you ask. Are you
able to drink the cup that I am about to drink? They say to him: We
are able.
23 He says to them: My cup indeed you shall drink, but to sit on my
right and on my left, it is not mine to give this, but it shall be given to
those for whom it has been prepared, by my Father.
24 But when the ten heard it, they were displeased with the two
brothers.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
49
25 But Jesus called them to him and said: You know that the rulers of
the Gentiles exercise lord ship over them, and the great exercise
authority over them.
26 Not so shall it be among you; but who ever will become great
among you shall be your minister;
27 and whoever will be first among you, shall be your servant;
28 as the Son of man came not to be ministered to, but to minister,
and give his life a ransom for many.
29 And as they went out from Jericho, a great multitude followed
him.
30 And behold, two blind men sitting by the way, hearing that Jesus
was passing by, cried out saying: Have mercy on us, son of David.
31 But the multitude rebuked them that they should be silent; and
they cried out the more, saying: Lord, have mercy on us, son of
David.
32 And Jesus stood still, and called them, and said: What will you
that I should do for you?
33 They say to him: Lord, that our eyes may be opened.
34 And moved with pity Jesus touched their eyes; and they
immediately received sight, and followed him.
Matthew 21
1 And when they were near to Jerusalem, and had come to Bethphage
to the mount of Olives, then Jesus sent two disciples,
2 saying to them: Go into the village that is opposite to you, and you
will immediately find an ass tied and a colt with her; loose and bring
them to me.
3 And if any one say anything to you, you shall say that the Lord has
need of them; and he will immediately send them.
4 And this was done that it might be fulfilled that was spoken
through the prophet, saying:
5 Say to the daughter of Zion: Behold, thy King comes to thee meek
and mounted on an ass, yes, on a colt the foal of a beast of burden.
6 And the disciples went and did as Jesus had commanded them,
7 and brought the ass and the colt, and put their mantles on them,
and he sat upon them.
8 And the most of the multitude spread their mantles in the road, but
others cut branches from the trees, and spread them in the road.
9 And the multitudes that went before him, and those that followed
cried out, saying: Hosanna to the Son of David, blessed is he that
comes in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest.
10 And as he entered into Jerusalem, the whole city was moved,
saying: Who is this?50
Codex Sinaiticus:
11 And the multitudes said: This is the prophet Jesus, who is from
Nazareth of Galilee.
12 And Jesus entered into the temple of God, and cast out all that
sold and bought in the temple, and overturned the tables of the
money changers, and the seats of those that sold doves,
13 and said to them: It is written: My house shall be called a house of
prayer; but you make it a den of robbers.
14 And there came to him the blind and the lame in the temple, and
he cured them.
15 And the chief priests and the scribes seeing the wonderful things
that he did, and the children crying out in the temple and saying:
Hosanna to the Son of David, they were displeased,
16 and said to him: Hearest thou what these say? And Jesus says to
them: Yes; have you never read that out of the mouth of babes and
sucklings thou hast prepared praise?
17 And he left them and went out of the city to Bethany, and spent
the night there.
18 But in the morning as he returned to the city he was hungry.
19 And seeing a fig tree on the road, he went to it, and found nothing
on it, but leaves only; and he said to it: Let fruit grow from thee no
more for ever. And the fig tree immediately withered.
20 And the disciples seeing it were astonished, saying: How did the
fig tree immediately wither?
21 But Jesus answered and said to them: Verily I say to you, if you
have faith and doubt not, you shall do not only this of the fig tree, but
if you say even to this mountain: Be taken up, and be thrown into the
sea, it shall be done.
22 And all things whatever you shall ask in prayer believing, you
shall receive.
23 And when he had come into the temple, as he was teaching, the
chief priests and the elders of the people came to him, saying: By I
what authority doest thou these things? and who gave thee this
authority?
24 But Jesus answered and said to them: I also will ask you one
word, which if you tell me, I also will tell you by what authority I do
these things.
25 The baptism of John, whence was it? Of heaven or of men? And
they reasoned with themselves, saying:
26 If we say: Of heaven, he will say to us: Why then did you not
believe him? but if we say: Of men, we fear the multitude; for all hold
John as a prophet.
27 And they answered Jesus and said: We know not. And he said to
them: Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
51
28 But what think you? A man had two sons; coming to the first he
said: Son, go, work today in the vineyard.
29 But he answered and said: I will not; afterward he regretted it and
went.
30 And coming to the other he said in like manner. And he answered
and said: I go, sir; and went not.
31 Which of the two did the will of the father? They say: The first.
Jesus says to them: Verily I say to you that the publicans and the
harlots go before you into the kingdom of God.
32 For John came to you in the way of righteousness, and you
believed him not; but the publicans and the harlots believed him; and
you, when you saw it, afterwards felt no regret that you might believe
him.
33 Hear another parable. A man was master of a house, and he
planted a vineyard, and put a hedge around it, and dug in it a wine
press and built a tower, and let it out to vinedressers, and went into
another country.
34 But when the season of the fruits drew near, he sent his servants
to the vine dressers, to receive his fruits.
35 And the vinedressers took his servants and scourged one, and
killed another, and threw stones at another.
36 Again he sent other servants more than the first, and they did to
them in like manner.
37 But at last he sent to them his son, saying: They will reverence my
son.
38 But the vinedressers seeing the son said among themselves: This
is the heir; come, let us kill him and have his inheritance.
39 And they took him, and cast him out of the vineyard, and killed
him.
40 When therefore the lord of the vineyard comes, what will he do to
those vinedressers?
41 They say to him: The wretches he will wretchedly destroy them,
and the vineyard he will let out to other vinedressers, who will render
to him the fruits in their seasons.
42 Jesus says to them: Did you never read in the Scriptures: A stone
which the builders rejected, this be came the head of the corner: this
was from the Lord, and it is wondrous in our eyes?
43 Wherefore I say to you that the kingdom of God shall be taken
from you, and shall be given to a nation bringing forth its fruits.
44 And he that falls upon this stone shall be dashed to pieces; but
him on whom it shall fall, it will make like chaff for the wind.
45 But when the chief priests and the Pharisees heard his parables,
they knew that he spoke of them;52
Codex Sinaiticus:
46 and seeking to lay hold of him they feared the multitudes, because
they held him as a prophet.
Matthew 22
1 And answering, Jesus again spoke to them in parables, saying:
2 The kingdom of the heavens is likened to a man, a king, who made
a marriage for his son.
3 And he sent forth his servants to call those that had been called to
the marriage; and they would not come.
4 Again he sent forth other servants, saying: Tell those who have
been called: Behold, I have prepared my dinner, my oxen and the
fallings are killed, and all things are ready: come to the marriage.
5 But they were careless and went away, one to his farm, another to
his merchandise.
6 But the rest, laying hold on his servants, outraged and slew them.
7 And the king was angry, and sending his armies, he destroyed those
murderers, and their city he set on fire.
8 Then said he to his servants: The marriage indeed is ready, but
those who were called were not worthy.
9 Go therefore to the crossroads, and whoever you find call to the
marriage.
10 And those servants went out into the roads, and brought together
all as many as they found, both bad and good, and the bride chamber
was filled with guests.
11 But when the king came in to look upon the guests, he saw there a
man that had not a wedding garment.
12 And he said to him: Friend, how camest thou in hither not having
a wedding garment? But he was silent.
13 Then the king said to the waiters: Bind his feet and hands and cast
him into the darkness that is without: there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth.
14 For many are called, but few chosen.
15 Then went the Pharisees and took counsel that they might entrap
him in a word.
16 And they send to him their disciples with the Herodians, saying:
Teacher, we know that thou art true, and teachest the way of God in
truth, and thou carest for no one, for thou lookest not on the person
of men:
17 tell us therefore, what thinkest thou? Is it lawful to give tribute to
Caesar or not?
18 But Jesus knowing their wickedness said: Why tempt me,
hypocrites?
19 Show me the tribute money. And they brought him a denarius.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
53
20 And Jesus says to them: Whose image is this, and the
superscription?
21 They say: Caesar’s. Then says he to them: Render therefore to
Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and to God the things that are
God’s.
22 And hearing they wondered, and leaving him they went away.
23 In that day came to him Sadducees who say that there is no
resurrection; and they asked him,
24 saying: Teacher, Moses said: If any one die not having children,
his brother shall marry his wife and raise up offspring for his brother.
25 Now there were with us seven brothers; and the first married and
died; and not having offspring he left his wife to his brother.
26 In like manner also the second and the third, to the seventh.
27 But last of all, the woman died.
28 In the resurrection, therefore, of which of the seven shall she be
the wife? for all had her.
29 But Jesus answered and said to them: You err, not knowing the
Scriptures nor the power of God.
30 For in the resurrection they neither marry nor are given in
marriage, but are as angels of God in heaven.
31 But, concerning the resurrection of the dead, have you not read
that which was spoken to you by God, saying:
32 I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob? He is not the God of the dead, but of the living.
33 And the multitudes hearing it were astonished at his teaching.
34 But the Pharisees, hearing that he had put the Sadducees to
silence, came together to the same place;
35 and one of them, a lawyer, asked a question, tempting him:
36 Teacher, what commandment is great in the law?
37 And he said to him: Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with thy
whole heart, and with thy whole soul, and with thy whole mind.
38 This is the great and first commandment.
39 A second is like it: Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.
40 On these two commandments hang the whole law and the
prophets.
41 But as the Pharisees had come together, Jesus asked them a
question,
42 saying: What think you of the Christ? Whose son is he? They say
to him: David’s.
43 He says to them: How then does David in spirit call him Lord,
saying:
44 The Lord said to my Lord: Sit at my right hand till I put thy
enemies under thy feet.54
Codex Sinaiticus:
45 If thus David calls him, Lord, how is he his son?
46 And no one was able to answer him a word, nor did any one from
that day venture to ask him another question.
Matthew 23
1 Then Jesus spoke to the multitudes and to his disciples,
2 saying: The scribes and Pharisees have sat down in Moses’ seat.
3 All things therefore whatever they bid you, do and observe; but do
not according to their works; for they say and do not.
4 And they bind heavy burdens and lay them on the shoulders of
men; but themselves will not move them with one of their fingers.
5 And all their works they do to be seen by men; for they make broad
their phylacteries, and enlarge their fringes;
6 and they love the first reclining places at suppers and the first seats
in the synagogues,
7 and the salutations in the markets, and to be called by men Rabbi.
8 But be you not called Rabbi; for one is your teacher, and you all
are, brethren.
9 And call no one on earth your father; for one is your Father, the
heavenly.
10 Neither be called leaders; for one is your leader, the Christ.
11 And the greatest of you shall be your minister.
12 For whoever shall exalt himself shall be humbled; and who ever
shall humble himself shall be exalted.
13 But alas for you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for you eat up
the houses of widows, and for a pretext make long prayers. For this
reason you shall receive the greater condemnation.
14 But alas for you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for you shut up
the kingdom of the heavens before men; for you go not in, neither do
you permit those who are entering, to go in.
15 Alas for you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for you compass
sea and land to make one proselyte; and when he is made, you make
him twofold more a child of hell than yourselves.
16 Alas for you, blind guides, who say: Whoever shall swear by the
temple, it is nothing; but whoever shall swear by the gold of the
temple, is a debtor.
17 Fools and blind; for which is greater, the gold or the temple that
sanctifies the gold?
18 And, Whoever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing; but whoever
shall swear by the gift that is on it, is a debtor.
19 Blind! for which is greater, the gift, or the altar that sanctifies the
gift?The H. T. Anderson New Testament
55
20 Therefore, he that swears by the altar swears by it, and by all that
is on it;
21 and he that swears by the temple swears by it, and by him that
dwells in it;
22 and he that swears by heaven swears by the throne of God, and by
him that sits upon it.
23 Alas for you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for you pay tithes
of mint and dill and cummin, and have neglected the weightier
matters of the law, the justice, and the mercy, and the faithfulness:
these ought you to have done, and those you ought not to have left
undone.
24 Blind guides, who strain out the gnat, but swallow the camel.
25 Alas for you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for you cleanse the
outside of the cup and the dish, but within they are full of rapine and
incontinence.
26 Blind Pharisee, cleanse first the inside of it the cup, that its
outside also may become clean.
27 Alas for you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for you are like
whitened sepulchers, which outwardly indeed appear beautiful, but
within are full of the bones of the dead and of all uncleanness.
28 So also you outwardly indeed appear to men to be righteous, but
within are full of hypocrisy and lawlessness.
29 Alas for you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for you build the
tombs of the prophets and adorn the sepulchers of the righteous,
30 and say: If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not
have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.
31 So then you testify for yourselves that you are the sons of those
who murdered the prophets.
32 Do you also fill up the measure of your fathers?
33 Serpents, brood of vipers, how can you escape the condemnation
of hell?
34 Wherefore, behold, I send to you prophets and wise men and
scribes: of them you will kill and crucify, and of them you will
scourge in your synagogues, and persecute from city to city:
35 that there may come on you all the righteous blood shed on the
earth, from the blood of Abel the righteous to the blood of Zachariah
son of Barachiah, whom you murdered between the temple and the
altar.
36 Verily I say to you, all these things shall come on this generation.
37 Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the prophets, and stonest them
that have been sent to thee, how often have I desired to gather thy
children, as a hen gathers her young under her wings, and you
refused.
38 Behold, your house is left to you deserted.56
Codex Sinaiticus:
39 For I say to you, you shall no more see me henceforth till you say:
Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord.
Matthew 24
1 And going out Jesus was departing from the temple; and his
disciples came to him to point out to him the buildings of the temple.
2 And he answered and said to them: See you not all these things?
Verily I say to you, there shall not be left here a stone upon a stone
that shall not be thrown down.
3 And as he sat upon the mount of Olives, his disciples came to him
privately, saying: Tell us, when shall these things be, and what the
sign of thy coming and of the conclusion of the age?
4 And Jesus answered and said to them: See that no one deceive you.
5 For many shall come in my name, saying: I am the Christ, and shall
deceive many.
6 But you shall hear of wars and rumors of wars; see that you be not
troubled; for they must be, but not yet is the end.
7 For nation shall rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom;
and there shall be famines and earthquakes in various places.
8 But all these are the beginning of pains.
9 Then they shall deliver you up to affliction, and shall kill you, and
you shall be hated by all nations because of my name.
10 And then shall many be offended, and deliver one another up, and
hate one another.
11 And many false prophets shall arise and deceive many.
12 And because iniquity shall be multiplied, the love of many shall
grow cold.
13 But he that endures to the end, he shall be saved.
14 And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in the whole
world for a testimony to all nations, and then shall the end come.
15 When therefore you see the abomination* of desolation, that was
spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing in the holy place, let the
reader understand,
* The Roman eagle causing desolation.
16 then let those that are in Judea flee to the mountains;
17 he that is on the housetop, let him not come down to take the
goods out of his house;
18 and he that is in the field, let him not turn back to take his
garment.
19 But alas for them that are with child, and them that give suck in
those days.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
57
20 And pray that your flight may not be in winter nor on a sabbath.
21 For there shall be great affliction, such as has not been from the
beginning of the world till now, nor shall ever be.
22 And unless those days had been shortened, no flesh should be
saved; but because of the elect those days shall be shortened.
23 Then if any one say to you: Lo, here is the Christ, or there, believe
it not.
24 For false Christs and false prophets shall arise, and shall give
great signs and wonders, so as to deceive, if possible, even the elect.
25 Behold, I have told you beforehand.
26 If then they say to you: Behold, he is in the desert, go not forth;
behold, he is in the secret chambers, believe not.
27 For as the lightning comes forth from the east and shines even to
the west, so shall the coming of the Son of man be.
28 Wherever the carcass is, there will the eagles come together.
29 But immediately after the affliction of those days the sun shall be
darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall
fall from the heavens, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken.
30 And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven, and
all the tribes of the land shall wail, and shall see the Son of man
coming on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.
31 And he shall send his angels with a great trumpet, and they shall
gather his elect from the four winds from the ends of the heavens to
the ends of them.
32 But from the fig tree learn the parable. When its branch has now
become tender and put forth leaves, you know that summer is near;
33 so also you, when you see all these things, know that it is near at
the doors.
34 Verily I say to you, this generation shall not pass away till all these
things take place.
35 Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass
away.
36 But of that day and hour no one knows, neither the angels of the
heavens, nor the Son, but the Father only.
37 But as the days of Noah, so shall the coming of the Son of man be.
38 For as they were in the days that were before the flood, eating and
drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, till the day in which Noah
entered the ark,
39 and knew not till the flood came and took them all away; so also
shall the coming of the Son of man be.
40 Then shall two men be in the field, one shall be taken and one left:
41 two women shall be grinding at the mill, one shall be taken and
one left.58
Codex Sinaiticus:
42 Watch therefore: for you know not in what day your Lord comes.
43 But know this: that if the master of the house had known at what
watch the thief would come, he would have kept awake and not have
permitted his house to be broken through.
44 Wherefore be you also ready, for at an hour at which you think not
the Son of man comes.
45 Who is then is the faithful and wise servant, whom the lord has set
over his household servants, to give them their food in season?
46 Blessed is that servant whom his lord on coming shall find so
doing.
47 Verily I say to you that he will set him over all his goods.
48 But if the wicked servant shall say in his heart: My lord delays,
49 and shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and shall eat and
drink with the drunken:
50 the lord of that servant shall come in a day which he looks not for,
and at an hour that he knows not,
51 and shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the
hypocrites: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
Matthew 25
1 Then shall the kingdom of the heavens be likened to ten virgins,
who took their lamps and went forth to meet the bridegroom.
2 And five of them were foolish and five were wise.
3 For the foolish took the lamps and took no oil with themselves;
4 but the wise took oil in the vessels with their own lamps.
5 But while the bridegroom delayed they all nodded and fell asleep.
6 And at midnight a cry was made: Behold the bridegroom; go out to
meet him.
7 Then arose all those virgins and adorned their lamps.
8 And the foolish said to the wise: Give us of your oil, for our lamps
are going out.
9 But the wise answered, saying: Lest perhaps there be not enough
for us and you, go rather to those that sell and buy for yourselves.
10 And while they were going to buy, the bridegroom came; and they
that were ready went in with him to the marriage, and the door was
shut.
11 But afterwards came also the other virgins, saying: Lord, Lord,
open for us.
12 But he answered and said: Verily I say to you, I know you not.
13 Watch therefore, for you know not the day nor the hour.
14 For as a man, on leaving home, called his servants, and delivered
to them his goods;The H. T. Anderson New Testament
59
15 and to one he gave five talents, to another two, to another one, to
each according to his own ability, and left home.
16 Immediately he that had received the five talents went and traded
with the same, and made other five talents.
17 In like manner he that had received the two gained other two.
18 But he that had received the one went and dug in the earth, and
hid his lord’s money.
19 But after a long time the lord of those servants comes and takes up
a settlement with them.
20 And he that had received the five talents came and brought other
five talents, saying: Lord, five talents thou didst deliver to me: see,
other five talents have I gained.
21 His lord said to him: Well done, good and faithful servant; thou
wast faithful over a few things, I will set thee over many: enter into
the joy of thy lord.
22 And he that had received the two talents came and said: Lord, two
talents thou didst deliver to me: see, other two talents have I gained.
23 His lord said to him: Well done, good and faithful servant; thou
wast faithful over a few things, I will set thee over many: enter into
the joy of thy lord.
24 And he that had received the one talent came and said: Lord, I
knew thee that thou art a hard man, reaping where thou didst not
sow, and gathering whence thou didst not scatter;
25 and being afraid I went and hid thy talent in the earth: lo, thou
hast thy own.
26 But his lord answered and said to him: Wicked and slothful
servant, didst thou know that I reap where I did not sow, and gather
whence I did not a scatter?
27 It behooved thee then to put my money with the bankers, and on
coming I could have received my own with interest.
28 Take then from him the talent and give it to him that has the ten
talents.
29 For to every one that has shall be given, and he shall have
abundance; but from him that has a not, even that which he has shall
be taken from him.
30 And cast the unprofitable servant into the darkness that is
without: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
31 But when the Son of man shall have come in his glory, and all the
angels with him, then shall he sit on the throne of his glory;
32 and there shall be gathered before him all the nations; and he
shall separate them one from another, as the shepherd separates the
sheep from the goats;
33 and he shall place the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on
the left.60
Codex Sinaiticus:
34 Then shall the king say to those on his right: Come, you blessed of
my Father, inherit the kingdom that has been prepared for you from
the foundation of the world.
35 For I was hungry, and you gave me to eat; I was thirsty, and you
gave me drink; I was a stranger, and you took me to your homes;
36 I was naked, and you clothed me; I was sick, and you visited me; I
was in prison, and you came to me.
37 Then shall the righteous answer him, saying: Lord, when saw we
thee hungry and fed thee? or thirsty and gave thee drink?
38 And when saw we thee a stranger and took thee to our homes? or
naked and clothed thee?
39 And when saw we thee sick or in prison and came to thee?
40 And the King shall answer and say to them: Verily I say to you,
Inasmuch as you did it to one of the least of these my brethren, you
did it to me.
41 Then shall, he say to those also on the left: Depart from me, you
cursed, into the eternal fire that is prepared for the devil and his
angels.
42 For I was hungry, and you gave me not to eat; I was thirsty, and
you gave, me no drink;
43 I was a stranger, and you took me not to your homes; naked, and
you clothed me not: sick and in prison, and you visited me not.
44 Then shall they also answer him, saying: Lord, when saw we thee
hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and
ministered not to thee?
45 Then shall he answer them, saying: Verily I say to you, Inasmuch
as you did it not to one of the least of these, you did it not to me.
46 And these shall go away into eternal punishment, but the
righteous into eternal life.
Matthew 26
1 And it came to pass when Jesus had finished all these words, he
said to his disciples:
2 You know that after two days the Passover is kept, arid the Son of
man is delivered up to be crucified.
3 Then came together the chief priests and the elders of the people
into the court of the chief priest who is called Caiaphas;
4 and they took counsel that they might take Jesus by craft and kill
him.
5 But they said: Not during the feast, lest a tumult arise among the
people.
6 And while Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper,The H. T. Anderson New Testament
61
7 there came to him a woman having an alabaster box of very costly
ointment, and she poured it on his head as he reclined at table.
8 And the disciples seeing it were displeased, saying: Why was this
waste?
9 for this could have been sold for much and given to the poor.
10 But Jesus perceiving it said to them: Why trouble the woman? for
she has wrought a good work on me.
11 For the poor you have always with you, but me you have not
always.
12 For she, in pouring this ointment on my body, has done it to
prepare me for burial.
13 Verily I say to you, Wherever this gospel shall be preached in the
whole world, this also which she has done shall be told for a
memorial of her.
14 Then went one of the twelve that was called Judas Iscariot, to the
chief priests
15 and said: What will you give me, and I will deliver him to you?
And they weighed to him thirty pieces of silver.
16 And from that time he sought an opportunity that he might deliver
him up.
17 And on the first day of the unleavened bread the disciples came to
Jesus, saying: Where wilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat the
Passover?
18 And he said: Go into the city to a certain man, and say to him: The
Teacher says: My time is at hand, with thee I keep the Passover with
my disciples.
19 And the disciples did as Jesus had commanded them, and made
ready the Passover.
20 But when evening had come, he reclined at table with the twelve
disciples.
21 And as they were eating he said; Verily I say to you that one of you
shall deliver me up.
22 And being very sad they began each one to say to him: Lord, is it
I?
23 But he answered and said: He that dips the hand with me into the
dish, he shall deliver me up.
24 The Son of man indeed goes as it is written of him. But alas for
that man, by whom the Son of man is delivered up: good were it for
that man if he had not been born.
25 And Judas who delivered him up answered and said: Rabbi, is it
I? He says to him: Thou hast said.
26 But as they were eating, Jesus took bread and having blessed he
broke, and giving to the disciples he said: Take, eat: This is my body.62
Codex Sinaiticus:
27 And he took the cup, and having given thanks he gave to them,
saying: Drink of it, all of you;
28 for this is my blood of the New Covenant, that is shed for many
for remission of sins.
29 But I say to you, I will not henceforth drink of this fruit of the
vine, till that day when I drink it with you new in the kingdom of my
Father.
30 And they sung a hymn and went out into the mount of Olives.
31 Then Jesus says to them: All of you shall be offended at me this
night. For it is written: I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the
flock shall be scattered.
32 But after I have risen, I will go before you into Galilee.
33 And Peter answered and said to him: Though all should be
offended at thee, I will never be offended.
34 Jesus said to him: Verily I say to thee that on this night, before a
cock shall have crowed, thou wilt deny me three times.
35 Peter says to him: Though it should be necessary for me to die
with thee, I will not deny thee. In like manner also said all the
disciples.
36 Then Jesus comes with them to a place called Gethsemane, and ii
says to the disciples: Sit here till I go and pray yonder.
37 And he took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and
began to be in grief and anguish.
38 Then he says to them: My soul is encompassed with sorrow even
to death: remain here and watch with me.
39 And going forward a little he fell upon his face in prayer, and
saying: Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass from me; and not as I
will, but as thou.
40 And he comes to his disciples and finds them sleeping, and says to
Peter: So you had not strength to watch with me one hour?
41 Watch and pray that you enter not into temptation. The spirit
indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.
42 Again a second time he went away and prayed, saying: My Father,
if this cannot pass away unless I drink it, thy will be a done.
43 And he came again and found them sleeping; for their eyes were
heavy.
44 And leaving them he again went away, and prayed the third time,
saying the same word again.
45 Then comes he to the disciples and says to them: Sleep the
remaining time and rest. Behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of
man is delivered into the hands of sinners.
46 Arise, let us go: behold, he is at hand that delivers me up.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
63
47 And as he was yet speaking, behold. Judas, one of the twelve, and
with him a great multitude with swords and clubs, came from the
chief priests and elders of the people,
48 He that delivered him up had given them a sign, saying: The one
that I shall kiss is he; hold him fast.
49 And immediately he came to Jesus, and said: Hail, Rabbi! and
kissed him.
50 Jesus said to him: Friend, for what purpose have you come? Then
they came, and laid hands on Jesus, and held him fast.
51 And behold, one of those who were with Jesus stretched out his
hand, and drew his sword, and struck the servant of the chief priest,
and cut off his ear.
52 Then Jesus said to him: Put back your sword into its place; for all
that take the sword shall perish by the sword.
53 Do you think that I cannot now call upon my Father, and he would
cause more than twelve legions of angels to stand by me?
54 But how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be?
55 At the same time Jesus said to the multitudes: Have you come out
as against a robber, with swords and clubs, to take me? I sat daily
with you in the temple and taught, and you did not take me.
56 All this was done, that the scriptures of the prophets might be
fulfilled. Then all the disciples left him and fled.
57 And those who took Jesus led him away to Caiaphas the chief
priest, where the scribes and elders had come together.
58 But Peter followed him, at a distance, to the palace of the chief
priest, and went in and sat with the attendants, to see the end.
59 And the chief priests and the elders, and the whole Sanhedrim,
sought false testimony against Jesus, that they might put him to
death,
60 and found none. Though many false witnesses came, yet they
found none. At last two false witnesses came,
61 and said: This man said, I am able to destroy the temple of God,
and to build it in three days.
62 And the chief priest arose, and said to him: Do you make no
answer? What do these testify against you?
63 But Jesus remained silent. And the chief priest answered and said
to him: I adjure you, by the living God, that you tell us whether you
are the Christ, the Son of God?
64 Jesus said to him: You have said. Moreover, I say to you, Here
after you shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of the
Almighty, and coming upon the clouds of heaven.
65 Then the chief priest rent his clothes, and said: He has spoken
impiously; what further need have we of witnesses? See now, you
have heard his impious words:64
Codex Sinaiticus:
66 What think you? They answered and said: He is a subject for
death.
67 Then did they spit in his face, and strike him with their fists; some
struck him with the open hand,
68 and said: Give an answer to us, Christ: Who is he that struck you?
69 But Peter was sitting without in the court; and a maidservant
came to him, and said: You also l were with Jesus of Galilee.
70 But he denied before them all, saying: I know not what you say.
71 And when he went out into the entrance, another maidservant saw
him, and said to those who were there: This man was also with Jesus
the Nazarene.
72 And again he denied, with an oath: I know not the man.
73 After a little while, those who stood by came and said to Peter: Of
a truth you also are one of them, for your speech betrays you.
74 Then he began to curse and to swear: I know not the man. And
immediately the cock crew.
75 And Peter remembered the word which Jesus had spoken to him:
Before the cock crows, you will deny me three times. And he went
out, and wept bitterly.
Matthew 27
1 When the morning came, all the chief priests and elders of the
people held a consultation against Jesus, that they might put him to
death.
2 And they bound him and led him away, and delivered him to
Pontius Pilate the governor.
3 Then Judas, who had delivered him up, when he saw that he was
condemned, stung by remorse, brought back the thirty pieces of
silver to the chief priests and elders,
4 saying: I have sinned in having delivered up innocent blood. But
they said: What is it to us? Thou wilt see to it.
5 And throwing the pieces of silver into the temple, he withdrew, and
went and hanged himself.
6 But the chief priests took the pieces of silver and said: It is not
lawful to put them into the sacred treasury, because they are the
price of blood.
7 But they took counsel and bought with them the potter’s field as a
burial place for strangers.
8 Wherefore, that field has been called the field of blood to this day.
9 Then was fulfilled that which was spoken through Jeremiah the
prophet, saying: And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of
him who had a price set upon him, on whom they of the sons of Israel
set a price,The H. T. Anderson New Testament
65
10 and gave them for the potter’s field, as the Lord commanded me,
11 But Jesus stood before the governor; and the governor asked him,
saying: Art thou the King of the Jews? And Jesus said: Thou sayest.
12 And while he was accused by the chief priests and elders he
answered nothing.
13 Then says Pilate to him: Hearest thou not how many things they
testify against thee?
14 And he answered him to not even one word, so that the governor
was greatly astonished.
15 But at every feast the governor had been accustomed to release to
the multitude one prisoner, whom they chose.
16 And they had then a notorious prisoner, called Barabbas.
17 When therefore they had come together Pilate said to them:
Whom will you that I release to you, Barabbas or Jesus who is called
Christ?
18 For he knew that for envy they had delivered him up.
19 And while he sat on the judgment seat, his wife sent to him,
saying: Have nothing to do with that just man; for I have suffered
much this day in a dream because of him.
20 But the chief priests and the elders persuaded the multitudes that
they should ask for Barabbas, and destroy Jesus.
21 And the governor answered and said to them: Which of the two
will you that I release to you? They said: Barabbas.
22 Pilate says to them: What then shall I do with Jesus who is called
Christ? They all say: Let him be crucified.
23 But he said: Why, what evil has he done? They cried out the more,
saying: Let him be crucified.
24 And Pilate seeing that nothing avails, but rather that a tumult is
rising, took water and washed his hands before the multitude, saying:
I am innocent of the blood of this man: see you to it.
25 And all the people answered and said: His blood be upon us and
upon our children.
26 Then he released to them Barabbas, but Jesus, after he had
scourged him, he delivered up that he might be crucified.
27 Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the palace and
brought together to him the whole band.
28 And having stripped him they put on him a purple cloak,
29 and having plaited a crown of thorns they put it on his head, and a
reed in his right hand, and bowing the knee before him they mocked
him, saying: Hail, King of the Jews;
30 and having spit upon him they took the reed and struck upon his
head.66
Codex Sinaiticus:
31 And when they had mocked him, they took off from him the cloak
and put his own garments on him, and led him away to crucify him.
32 And going out they found a man of Cyrene, named Simon: him
they impressed to carry his cross.
33 And when they had come to a place called Golgotha, which is
called the place of a skull,
34 they gave him to drink wine mingled with gall; and when he had
tasted, he would not drink.
35 But when they had crucified him, they divided his garments,
casting the lot;
36 and sitting down they watched him there.
37 And they placed over his head his accusation written: THIS IS
JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS.
38 Then were crucified with him two robbers, one on the right and
one on the left.
39 And they that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads
40 and saying: Thou that destroyest the temple and buildest it in
three days, save thyself, if thou art the Son of God, and come down
from the cross.
41 In like manner the chief priests mocking with the scribes and
elders said:
42 Others he saved, himself he cannot save; King of Israel is he, let
him now come down from the cross, and we will believe on him;
43 he trusted in God; let him deliver him now, if he delights in him;
for he said: I am the Son of God.
44 And the robbers that were crucified with him uttered the same
reproaches against him.
45 But from the sixth hour darkness came over all the land till the
ninth hour. 46 And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud
voice, saying: Elei, Elei, lema sabachtha nei? that is, My God, my
God, why hast thou forsaken me?
47 And some of them that stood there hearing it said: This man calls
for Elijah.
48 And immediately one of them ran and took a sponge, and having
filled it with vinegar and put it on a reed, gave it to him to drink.
49 But the rest said: Wait, let us see if Elijah is coming to save him.
50 But Jesus again cried out with a loud voice, and gave up the spirit.
51 And behold, the veil of the temple was rent into two from top to
bottom, and the earth quaked, and the rocks were rent,
52 and the sepulchers were opened, and many bodies of the saints
that slept awoke;
53 and they came out of their sepulchers after his resurrection, and
went into the holy city, and appeared to many.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
67
54 And the centurion and those who were with him watching Jesus,
seeing the earthquake and what things had taken place, were greatly
afraid, saying: Truly this was the Son of God.
55 And many women were there looking on from a distance, who had
followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering to him:
56 among whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of
James and Joseph, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.
57 But when evening had come, there came a rich man of
Arimathaea, named Joseph, who also himself was a disciple of Jesus:
58 this man went to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus. Then
Pilate commanded it to be given.
59 And taking the body Joseph wrapped it in clean linen,
60 and laid it in his new sepulcher which he had hewn in the rock;
and having rolled a great stone to the door of the sepulcher he
departed.
61 And Mary Magdalene was there, and the other Mary, sitting
opposite to the tomb.
62 But on the morrow, which is after the preparation, the chief
priests and the Pharisees came together to Pilate,
63 saying: Sir, we remember that that deceiver said, while yet alive:
After three days, I shall arise.
64 Command therefore that the tomb be made safe till the third day,
lest perhaps the disciples come and steal him and say to the people:
He has risen from the dead, and the last deception shall be worse
than the first.
65 Pilate said to them: You have a guard: go, make it as safe as you
know how.
66 And they went and made the tomb safe, sealing the stone and
setting the guard.
Matthew 28
1 But after the sabbath, as it began to dawn into the first of the week,
came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary to see the tomb.
2 And lo, there had been a great earthquake; for an angel of the Lord
having descended from heaven and come, had rolled away the stone
and had sat upon it.
3 And his appearance was like lightning, and his raiment white as
snow.
4 And for fear of him the keepers did shake and became as dead men.
5 But the angel answered and said to the women: Fear not you; for I
know that you seek Jesus who was crucified;
6 he is not here; for he has risen as he said: Come, see the place
where he lay.68
Codex Sinaiticus:
7 And go quickly and tell his disciples that he has risen from the
dead; and behold, he goes before you into Galilee: there you shall see
him. Lo, I have told you.
8 And going away quickly from the sepulcher with fear and great joy,
they ran to bring his disciples word.
9 And behold, Jesus met them, saying: Hail. And they came and laid
hold of his feet, and worshipped him.
10 Then says Jesus to them: Fear not: go, tell my brethren that they
go into Galilee, and there shall they see me.
11 But as they were going, be hold, some of the guard came into the
city and told the chief priests all that had been done.
12 And having come together with the elders, and taken counsel, they
gave much money to the soldiers,
13 saying: Say that his disciples came by night and stole him while we
slept.
14 And if this be heard before the governor, we will persuade him and
make you secure.
15 And they took the money and did as they were taught; and this
saying is commonly reported among the Jews to this day.
16 But the eleven disciples went into Galilee, to a mountain where
Jesus had appointed them;
17 and when they saw him they worshipped, but some doubted.
18 And Jesus came and spoke to them, saying : All authority in
heaven and on earth has been given to me.
19 Go, make disciples of all nations, baptizing them into the name of
the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit.
20 teaching them to observe all things whatever I commanded you.
And lo, I am with you, all the days, to the conclusion of the age.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
69
According to Mark
Mark 1
1 The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ,
2 As it is written in Isaiah the prophet: Behold, I send my messenger
before thy face, who shall prepare thy way:
3 The voice of one crying in the wilderness: Make ready the way of
the Lord, make his paths straight.
4 It was John who baptized in the wilderness and preached the
baptism of repentance for the remission of sins.
5 And there went out to him all the country of Judea and all they of
Jerusalem and were baptized by him in the river Jordan, confessing
their sins.
6 And John was clothed with camel’s hair and a girdle of leather
around his loins, and he ate locusts and wild honey.
7 And he preached, saying: After me comes he that is mightier than I,
the strap of whose sandals I am not worthy to stoop down and loose.
8 I have baptized you in water, but he shall baptize you in the Holy
Spirit.
9 And it came to pass in those days that Jesus came from Nazareth of
Galilee and was baptized in the Jordan by John.
10 And immediately going up out of the water he saw the heavens
rent, and the Spirit like a dove coming down upon him.
11 And there was a voice from the heavens: Thou art my beloved Son,
in thee I am well pleased.
12 And immediately the Spirit drives him into the wilderness.
13 And he was in the wilderness forty days tempted by Satan; and he
was with the wild beasts, and the angels ministered to him.
14 But after John was delivered up, Jesus came into Galilee,
preaching the gospel of God,
15 that the time is fulfilled and the kingdom of God is at hand:
Repent and believe in the gospel.
16 And passing along by the sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and Andrew
the brother of Simon throwing a net about in the sea; for they were
fishers.
17 And Jesus said to them: Come after me, and I will make you
become fishers of men.
18 And immediately leaving the nets they followed him.
19 And going forward a little he saw James the son of Zebedee and
John his brother, who were also in the ship mending the nets.
20 And he immediately called them; and leaving their father Zebedee
in the ship with the hired servants they went away after him.70
Codex Sinaiticus:
21 And they entered into Capernaum; and immediately, on the
sabbath, he taught in the synagogue.
22 And they were astonished at his teaching; for he taught them as
having authority, and not as the scribes.
23 And immediately there was in their synagogue a man with an
unclean spirit; and he cried out,
24 Saying: What have we to do with thee, Jesus the Nazarene? thou
hast come to destroy us. We know thee who thou art, the Holy One of
God.
25 And Jesus rebuked him: Be silent, and come out of him.
26 And the unclean spirit threw him into convulsions, and having
cried out with a loud voice came out of him.
27 And all were amazed, so that they inquired one of another, saying:
What means this? A new teaching according to authority: he also
commands the unclean spirits, and they obey him.
28 And his fame immediately went forth everywhere into the whole
surrounding country of Galilee.
29 And immediately on going out of the synagogue, they came into
the house of Simon and Andrew with James and John.
30 And the mother-in-law of Simon lay ill of a fever and they
immediately tell him of her.
31 And he came to her and raised her up, taking her by the hand. And
the fever left her, and she ministered to them.
32 But after evening had come, when the sun went down, they
brought to him all that were sick, and those possessed with demons;
33 And the whole city was collected together at the door.
34 And he cured many that were sick with various diseases, and cast
out many demons, and permitted not the demons to speak, because
they knew him.
35 And very early while yet night, he rose up and went out, and went
away to a desert place, and there prayed.
36 And Simon and they that were with him followed after him.
37 And found him, and said to him: All seek for thee.
38 And he said to them: Let us go elsewhere to the next towns, that I
may preach there also; for to this end came I forth.
39 And he went through the whole of Galilee, preaching in their
synagogues, and casting out demons.
40 And there came to him a leper, entreating him and kneeling,
saying to him: If thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.
41 And moved with pity he stretched forth his hand and touched him
and said: I will; be clean.
42 And the leprosy immediately departed from him, and he was
made clean.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
71
43 And after charging him in a threatening manner, he immediately
sent him forth,
44 and said to him: See that thou say nothing to any one, but go,
show thyself to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing the things that
Moses commanded, for a testimony to them.
45 But he went out and began to proclaim it much, and publish the
matter abroad, so that he could no longer openly enter into a city, but
was without in desert places; and they came to him from every
quarter.
Mark 2
1 And entering again into Capernaum after some days, it was
reported that he was in a house.
2 And many came together, so that the house could no longer contain
them, nor the space about the door; and he spoke the word to them.
3 And they came bringing to him a palsied man borne by four.
4 And not being able to bring him near to him on account of the
multitude, they took off the roof where he was, and digging through,
they let down the bed on which the palsied man lay.
5 And Jesus seeing their faith says to the palsied man: Son, thy sins
are forgiven.
6 But some of the scribes were sitting there and reasoning in their
hearts:
7 Why speaks this man thus? He blasphemes: who can forgive sins
but one, God?
8 And Jesus immediately perceiving by his spirit that they thus
reasoned in themselves, said to them: Why reason these things in
your hearts?
9 Which is easier, to say to the palsied man: Thy sins are forgiven, or
to say: Rise and take up thy bed and go?
10 But that you may know that the Son of man on earth has authority
to forgive sins, he says to the palsied man:
11 I say to thee, rise, take up thy bed and go to thy house.
12 And he arose and immediately taking up his bed, he went out
before all, so that they all were astonished, and glorified. God, saying:
Thus never saw we.
13 And he went forth again to the sea; and all the multitude came to
him, and he taught them
14 And passing by he saw Levi the son of Alphaeus sitting at the
customs-house, and said to him: Follow me And he rose up and
followed him.
15 And it came to pass that he was reclining at table in his house, and
many publicans and sinners reclined at table with Jesus and his
disciples; for there were many, and there followed him,72
Codex Sinaiticus:
16 also the scribes of the Pharisees. And seeing that he ate with the
publicans and sinners, they said to his disciples: Why does he eat and
drink with the publicans and sinners?
17 And hearing it Jesus says to them: They that are in health have no
need of a physician, but they that are sick: I came not to call
righteous men, but sinners.
18 And the disciples of John and the Pharisees were fasting. And they
come and say to him: Why do the disciples of John and the disciples
of the Pharisees fast, but thy disciples fast not?
19 And Jesus said to them: Can the sons of the bride-chamber fast
while the bridegroom is with them? As long as they have the
bridegroom with them, they can not fast.
20 But days will come when the bridegroom shall be taken away from
them, and then shall they fast in that day.
21 No one sews a piece of unfulled cloth on an old garment:
otherwise, that which fills up takes from it, the new from the old, and
a worse rent is made.
22 And no one puts new wine into old bottles: otherwise, the wine
bursts the bottles, and the wine and bottles are lost.
23 And it came to pass that he was going on the sabbath through the
fields of grain; and his disciples began to go on the way pulling the
ears of grain.
24 And the Pharisees said to him: See, why are they doing on the
sabbath that which is not lawful?
25 And he said to them: Did you never read what David did, when he
had need and was hungry, he and those who were with him?
26 how he entered into the house of God, in the days of Abiathar the
chief priest, and ate the loaves of the presence, which it is not lawful
to eat but for the priests, and gave to those also that were with him?
27 And he said to them: The sabbath was made for man, and not man
for the sabbath:
28 So then the Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath.
Mark 3
1 And he entered again into a synagogue; and a man was there that
had a withered hand;
2 And they watched him if he would cure him on the sabbath, that
they might accuse him.
3 And he says to the man that had the withered hand: Rise and come
into the midst.
4 And he says to them: Is it lawful on the sabbath to do good or to do
evil, to save life or to kill? But they were silent.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
73
5 And looking around on them with anger, being grieved at the
hardness of their heart, he says to the man: Stretch forth the hand.
And he stretched it forth, and his hand was restored to health.
6 And the Pharisees went out immediately with the Herodians, and
took counsel against him, that they might destroy him.
7 And Jesus withdrew with his disciples to the sea; and a great
multitude followed from Galilee and from Judea,
8 And from Jerusalem and from Idumea and beyond the Jordan and
about Tyre and Sidon, a great multitude, hearing what things he did,
came to him.
9 And he spoke to his disciples that a small ship should wait upon
him because of the multitude, that they might not throng him;
10 For he cured many, so that they fell upon him, that they might
touch him, as many as had scourges.
11 And the unclean spirits, when they saw him, fell down before him
and cried out, saying: Thou art the Son of God.
12 And he charged their minds that they should not make him
known.
13 And he went up into the mountain, and called to him whom he
would; and they came to him.
14 And he appointed twelve that they might be with him, and that he
might send them forth to preach,
15 and to have authority to cast out the demons.
16 And he appointed the twelve; and Simon he surnamed Peter.
17 And James the son of Zebedee and John the brother of James; and
these he surnamed Boanerges, which is sons of thunder;
18 And Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew, and Matthew, and
Thomas, and James the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus, and Simon
the Canaanite,
19 and Judas Iscariot, who also delivered him up, and he came into a
house;
20 And a multitude again came together, so that they were able not
even to eat bread.
21 And his relatives hearing it came forth to take him; for they said:
He is beside himself.
22 And the scribes that came down from Jerusalem said: He has
Beelzebub, and by the prince of the demons he casts out the demons.
23 And he called them to him and spoke to them in parables: How
can Satan cast out Satan?
24 And if a kingdom be divided against itself, that kingdom can not
stand.
25 And if a house be divided against itself, that house can not stand.74
Codex Sinaiticus:
26 And if Satan rise up against himself, he is divided; and he can not
stand, but has an end.
27 But no one is able, on entering into the house of the strong man,
to seize upon his instruments, unless he first bind the strong man,
and then he will plunder his house.
28 Verily I say to you that all shall be forgiven the sons of men, the
sins and the blasphemies, whatever things they shall blasphemously
utter;
29 But whoever shall blaspheme against the Holy Spirit, has
forgiveness never, but is guilty of an eternal sin.
30 Because they said: He has an unclean spirit.
31 And his mother and his brothers came, and standing without sent
to him calling him.
32 And a multitude sat about him; and they said to him: Behold, thy
mother, and thy brothers, and thy sisters without seek thee.
33 And he answered and said to them: Who is my mother, and who
are my brothers?
34 And looking around on those sitting round about him, he says:
Behold my mother and my brothers.
35 Whoever shall have done the will of God, this is my brother and
sister and mother.
Mark 4
1 And again he began to teach by the sea. And there came together to
him a very great multitude, so that he entered into a ship and sat in
the sea, and the whole multitude was by the sea on the land.
2 And he taught them many things in parables, and said to them in
his teaching:
3 Hear; Behold, the sower went forth to sow.
4 And it came to pass while he sowed some fell by the way, and the
birds came and ate it up.
5 And other fell on the rocky place, where it had not much earth; and
it immediately sprung up because it had not depth of earth;
6 And when the sun had risen, it was scorched; and because it had no
root it withered.
7 And other fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked it
and it produced no fruit.
8 And others fell on good ground and yielded fruit, growing up and
increasing, and produced to thirty and to sixty and to a hundred.
9 And he said: He that has ears to hear, let him hear.
10 And when he was alone, those about him with the twelve asked
him about the parables.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
75
11 And he said to them: To you is given the mystery of the kingdom of
God but to them that are without all things are done in parables;
12 that seeing they may see and may not perceive; and hearing they
may hear and not understand; lest perhaps they should turn and it;
should be forgiven them.
13 And he says to them: Know you not this parable, and how will you
know all parables?
14 The sower sows the word.
15 But these are they that are by the way side where the word is
sown; and when they hear, Satan immediately comes and takes away
the word that is sown in them.
16 And these are they in like manner that were sown on the rocky
places; who when they hear the word immediately with joy receive it;
17 And yet they have no root in themselves, but endure for a time:
then when affliction or persecution arises because of the word they
immediately take offense.
18 And others are they that were sown over the thorns: these are they
that hear the word,
19 And the cares of the age, and the deceitfulness of riches, and the
desires about other things entering in choke the word, and it
becomes unfruitful.
20 And they that were sown on good ground are those who hear the
word and receive it, and bring forth fruit in thirties, and in sixties,
and in hundreds.
21 And he said to them: Is a lamp brought that it may be put under
the measure or under the bed? Is it not brought that it may be put on
the lampstand?
22 For there is nothing hid, unless that it may be made manifest: nor
was any thing concealed, but that it might come into open view.
23 If any one has ears to hear, let him hear.
24 And he said to them: Take heed what you hear. With what
measure you measure it shall be measured to you, and more shall be
given to you.
25 For he that has, to him shall be given; and he that has not, even
that which he has shall be taken from him.
26 And he said: So is the kingdom of God, as if a man should sow
seed upon the earth,
27 And should sleep and awake night and day, and the seed should
spring up and grow, he knows not how.
28 The earth of its own accord brings forth fruit, first the blade, then
the ear, then the full grain in the ear.
29 But when the fruit shall have presented itself, immediately he
sends forth the sickle, because the harvest is ready.76
Codex Sinaiticus:
30 And he said: How shall we liken the kingdom of God, or with what
parable shall we set it forth?
31 It is like a grain of mustard, which, when it is sown on the earth, is
less than all the seeds that are on the earth;
32 And yet when it is sown, it springs up and becomes greater than
all garden-plants, and; makes great branches, so that the birds of
heaven can lodge under its shadow.
33 And with many such parables spoke he the word to them, as they
were able to hear;
34 But without a parable spoke he not to them; but privately he
explained all things to his disciples.
35 And on that day when it was evening he says to them: Let us pass
over to the other side.
36 And leaving the multitude they took him as he was in the ship,
and there were also other ships with him.
37 And there came a great storm of wind, and the waves beat into the
ship, so that the ship was now full.
38 And he was sleeping in the prow on the boat-cushion; and they
awoke him and said to him: Teacher, carest thou not that we perish?
39 And he awoke and rebuked the wind and said to the sea: Peace be
still. And the wind ceased, and there was a great calm.
40 And he said to them: Why are you so fearful? How have you no
faith?
41 And they were afraid with great fear, and said one to another:
Who then is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?
Mark 5
1 And they came to the other side of the sea to the, country of the
Gadarenes.
2 And when he had come out of the ship, immediately there met him
a man from the tombs with an unclean spirit,
3 Who had his dwelling among the tombs; and not even with a chain
was any one any longer able to bind him,
4 Because he had often been bound with fetters and chains, and the
chains had been pulled asunder by him and the fetters had been
broken; and no one was able to subdue him;
5 And always night and day among the tombs and in the mountains
he was crying out and cutting himself with stones.
6 And seeing Jesus at a distance he ran and worshipped him;
7 and crying out with a loud voice, he said: What have I to do with
thee, Jesus, Son of God most high? I adjure thee by God, that thou
torment me not.
8 For he said to him: Unclean spirit, come out of the man.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
77
9 And he asked him: What is thy name? And he said to him: My
name is legion, for we are many.
10 And they besought him much that he would not send them out of
the country.
11 But there was there near the mountain a great herd of swine
feeding;
12 And they besought him, saying: Send us to the swine that we may
enter into them.
13 And he permitted them. And the unclean spirits came out and
entered into the swine; and the herd, about two thousand, rushed
down the steep into the sea, and were choked in the sea.
14 And those who fed them fled, and told it in the city and in the
country; and they came I to see what it was that had been done.
15 And they come to Jesus and see him that had the demon, sitting,
clothed and in his right mind, him that had had the legion, and they
were afraid.
16 And they that had seen told them how it had happened to the
demon and concerning the swine.
17 And they began to beseech him to depart from their borders.
18 And as he was entering the ship, he that had been possessed with
the demon besought him that he might be with him.
19 And he permitted him not, but said to him: Go to thy house to thy
own, and tell them what things the Lord has done for thee, and has
had mercy on thee.
20 And he went away, and began to proclaim in Decapolis what
things Jesus had done for him; and all were astonished.
21 And when Jesus had again passed over in the ship to the other
side, a great multitude came together to him, and he was by the sea.
22 And there comes one of the rulers of the synagogue, named
Jairus; and seeing him he falls at his feet,
23 and beseeches him much, saying: My little daughter is at the point
of death, I pray that thou wouldst come and lay thy hand on her, that
she may be saved and live.
24 And he went away with him; and a great multitude followed him,
and they pressed upon him.
25 And a woman that had had an issue of blood for twelve years,
26 And had suffered many things under many physicians, and had
spent all that she had, and was in no way benefited, but rather grew
worse.
27 Hearing of the things concerning Jesus, came behind in the
multitude, and touched his clothes;
28 For she said: If I may touch even his clothes, I shall be saved.
29 And immediately the fountain of her blood dried up, and she
knew in her body that she was restored to health from that scourge.78
Codex Sinaiticus:
30 And Jesus immediately perceiving in himself that power had gone
forth from him, turned about in the multitude and said: Who
touched my clothes?
31 And his disciples said to him: Seest thou the multitude thronging
thee and sayest thou: Who touched me?
32 And he looked around to see her that had done this.
33 But the woman being afraid and trembling, knowing what had
been done for her, came and fell before him and told him all the
truth.
34 And he said to her: Daughter, thy faith has saved thee: go in
peace, and be well of thy scourge.
35 While he was yet speaking there came some from the house of the
ruler of the synagogue, saying: Thy daughter is dead, why trouble the
Teacher further?
36 But Jesus, disregarding the word that was spoken, said to the
ruler of the synagogue: Fear not, only believe.
37 And he permitted no one to follow with him but Peter, and James,
and John the brother of James.
38 And they come to the house of the ruler of the synagogue; and he
sees a tumult, and those who wept and bewailed much;
39 And entering in he says to them: Why make a tumult and weep?
The child is not dead, but sleeps.
40 And they derided him. But he, having put them all out, takes the
father of the child, and the mother, and those with him, and goes in
where the child was.
41 And he took the child by the hand and said to her: Talitha kumi,
which is translated: Maiden, I say to thee, arise.
42 And the maiden immediately rose up and walked; for she was
twelve years old. And they were immediately astonished with great
astonishment.
43 And he charged them much that no one should know this and
commanded that there should be given her to eat.
Mark 6
1 And he went out thence, and came into his own country; and his
disciples followed him.
2 And when the sabbath had come he began to teach in the
synagogue; and many hearing were astonished, saying: Whence has
this man these things, and what the wisdom that is given to this
man? and are such mighty deeds done through his hands?
3 Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary, and brother of James and
Joses and Judah and Simon? And are not his sisters here with us?
And they were offended at him.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
79
4 And Jesus said to them: A prophet is not without honor, unless in
his own country, and among his relatives, and in his own house.
5 And he was able to do no mighty work there, except that he laid his
hands on a few sick persons and cured them.
6 And he wondered because of their unbelief. And he went about the
villages round about teaching.
7 And he called to him the twelve, and began to send them forth two
and two; and gave them authority over unclean spirits;
8 And charged them to take nothing for the journey but a staff only;
no bread, no bag, no brass in the girdle,
9 But be shod with sandals: and put not on two coats.
10 And he said to them: Wherever you enter a house, there abide till
you go forth thence.
11 And whatever place shall not have received you nor heard you,
when you go out thence, shake off the dust that is under your feet, for
a testimony against them.
12 And they went forth and preached that men should repent;
13 and they cast out many demons, and anointed with oil many sick
and cured them.
14 And Herod the king heard, for his name had become known, and
said: John the Baptist has risen from the dead, and for this reason
the powers are active within him.
15 But others said: It is Elijah; but others said: He is a prophet like
one of the prophets.
16 But Herod, when he heard, said: John whom I beheaded, he has
risen.
17 For Herod himself had sent and taken John, and bound him in
prison because of Herodias the wife of his brother Philip, for he had
married her.
18 For John said to Herod: It is not lawful for thee to have thy
brother’s wife.
19 And Herodias was angry with him, and desired to kill him, and
was not able.
20 For Herod feared John, knowing him to be a righteous and holy
man, and he kept him in safety, and hearing him he was much
perplexed, and heard him with pleasure.
21 And a suitable time having come, when Herod on his birthday had
made a supper for his great men, and the officers of thousands, and
the first men of Galilee;
22 and the daughter of the same Herodias having come in and
danced, she pleased Herod and those that reclined with him at table;
and the king said to the maiden: Ask of me whatever thou wilt, and I
will give thee.80
Codex Sinaiticus:
23 And he swore to her: Whatever thou shalt ask I will give thee to
the half of my kingdom.
24 And she went out and said to her mother: What shall I ask? And
she said: The head of John the Baptist.
25 And coming in immediately with haste to the king, she asked,
saying: I will that thou at once give me in a dish the head of John the
Baptist.
26 And the king though he became very sad, because of the oaths
and; those that reclined at table with him would not reject her.
27 And the king immediately sent an executioner and ordered to
bring his head.
28 And he went and beheaded him in the prison, and brought his
head in a dish, and gave it to the maiden; and the maiden gave it to
her mother.
29 And his disciples heard it and came and took away his corpse, and
laid him in a sepulcher.
30 And the apostles came together to Jesus, and told him all things
that they had done and taught.
31 And he says to them: Do you yourselves come apart to a desert
place, and rest a little. For many were coming and going, and they
had leisure not even to eat.
32 And they went away by ship to a desert place apart.
33 And many saw them going and knew them, and ran thither on
foot from all the cities, and outwent them.
34 And coming out he saw a great multitude, and was moved with
pity for them, because they were as sheep that had no shepherd, and
began to teach them many things.
35 And as much time had already passed, his disciples came and
said: The place is desert, and already much time is spent:
36 dismiss them, that they may go into the country and villages
round about and buy for themselves what they may eat.
37 But he answered and said to them: Do you give them to eat. And
they say to him: Shall we go and buy two hundred denarii worth of
bread, and give them to eat?
38 But he says to them: How many loaves have you? Go, see. And
having learned they say: Five and two fishes.
39 And he ordered them that all should recline by table-parties on
the green grass.
40 And they reclined in oblong squares, by hundreds and by fifties.
41 And having taken the five loaves and the two fishes, he looked up
to heaven and blessed; and broke the loaves, and gave to the disciples
to set before them; and the two fishes he divided among all.
42 And all ate and were filled:The H. T. Anderson New Testament
81
43 And they took up of the broken pieces twelve provision-baskets
full, and of the fishes.
44 And those that had eaten the loaves were five thousand men.
45 And he immediately constrained his disciples to enter the ship,
and go before him to the other side to Bethsaida till he himself
should send away the multitude.
46 And having sent them away he went into the mountain to pray.
47 And when evening had come, the ship was in the midst of the sea,
and himself alone on the land.
48 And seeing them toiling in rowing, for the wind was against them,
about the fourth watch of the night he came to them walking on the
sea. And he intended to pass by them.
49 But seeing him walking on the sea they thought that it was a
specter, and cried out;
50 for they all saw him and were alarmed. But he immediately talked
with them, and said to them: Take courage, it is I, be not afraid.
51 And he went up to them into the ship and the wind ceased. And
they were greatly astonished in themselves beyond measure.
52 For they had not learned by means of the loaves, but their heart
was hardened.
53 And when they had passed over to the land they came to
Gennesaret, and drew to shore.
54 And when they had come out of the ship, they immediately knew
him,
55 And ran about that whole country, and began to carry the sick
about in beds where they heard that he was.
56 And wherever he went into villages, or cities, or the country, they
laid the sick in the markets, and besought him that they might touch
even the fringe of his mantle; and as many as touched him were
saved.
Mark 7
1 And there came together to him the Pharisees and some of the
scribes that had come from Jerusalem.
2 And seeing some of his disciples that they ate bread with common,
that is, with unwashed hands,
3 for the Pharisees and all the Jews, unless they wash their hands
often, eat not. Holding the tradition of the elders;
4 And when they come from market, unless they immerse
themselves, they eat not; and there are many other things that they
received to hold, the immersion of cups and pitchers and brazen
vessels:82
Codex Sinaiticus:
5 And the Pharisees and the scribes asked him: Why walk not thy
disciples according to the tradition of the elders, but eat bread with
common hands?
6 And he said to them: Well did Isaiah prophesy of you hypocrites, as
it is written. This people honor me with their lips, but their heart is
far distant from me;
7 but in vain do they offer reverence to me, teaching teachings the
commandments of men.
8 Leaving the commandment of God you hold the tradition of men.
9 And he said to them: Well do you set aside the commandment of
God, that you may keep your tradition.
10 For Moses said: Honor thy father and thy mother, and: He that
curses father or mother let him surely die.
11 But you say: If a man shall say to his father or mother: That, by
whatever thou mightest receive aid from me, is corban, which is a
gift.
12 You no longer permit him to do any thing for his father or mother,
13 Making the word of God of no effect by your tradition which you
have delivered. And many things like these you do.
14 And again calling the multitude to him he said to them: Hear me,
all of you, and understand.
15 There is nothing from without a man, that entering into him can
defile him; but the things that proceed from a man are they that
defile a man.
16 [no verse]
17 And when he had entered the house apart from the multitude, his
disciples asked him about the parable.
18 And he said to them: So even you are without understanding? Do
you not perceive that nothing from without by entering into a man
can defile him?
19 because it goes not into his heart, but into his belly, and is cast out
into the sink, making all meats clean.
20 But he said: That which proceeds from a man, that defiles a man.
21 For from within, out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts,
lewdness, thefts, murders,
22 Adulteries, covetousness, wicked counsels, deceit, wantonness, an
evil eye, blasphemy, haughtiness, folly:
23 All these wicked things proceed from within, and defile a man.
24 But he arose and went away thence into the borders of Tyre. And
entering a house he desired that no one should know it, and was not
able to escape notice;
25 But a woman, whose little daughter had an unclean spirit,
immediately heard of him, and came in and fell at his feet;The H. T. Anderson New Testament
83
26 The woman was a Greek, a Syrophenician by nation; and she
asked him to cast the demon out of her daughter.
27 And he said to her: Let the children first be filled; for it is not good
to take the children’s bread and throw it to the little dogs.
28 But she answered and said to him: Yes, Lord; and yet the little
dogs under the table eat of the children’s crumbs.
29 And he said to her: Because of this saying go, the demon has gone
out of thy daughter.
30 And she went away to her house, and found the little child lying
on the bed, and the demon gone out.
31 And again going forth out of the borders of Tyre, he came through
Sidon to the sea of Galilee, through the midst of the borders of
Decapolis.
32 And they bring to him one deaf and that spoke with difficulty; and
they beseech him to lay his hand on him.
33 And taking him aside from the multitude, he put his fingers into
his ears, and spit, and touched his tongue.
34 and looking up to heaven he sighed, and said to him: Ephphatha,
which is, Be opened.
35 And his ears were opened, and the string of his tongue was
immediately loosed, and he spoke plainly.
36 And he charged them to tell no one; but as much as he charged
them, the more abundantly they proclaimed it.
37 And they were exceedingly amazed, saying: He has done all things
well: he makes both the deaf to hear and the dumb to speak,
Mark 8
1 In those days, the multitude again being great, and they having
nothing to eat, he called his disciples to him and said to them:
2 I have pity on the multitude, because they have now continued with
me three days, and have nothing to eat.
3 And if I send them away to their homes fasting, they will faint on
the way; and some of them have come from far.
4 And his disciples answered him: Whence shall any one be able to
satisfy these with bread here in the wilderness?
5 And he asked them: How many loaves have you? They said: Seven.
6 And he commanded the multitude to recline on the ground; and
taking the seven loaves, he gave thanks, broke, and gave to his
disciples to set before them; and they set them before the multitude.
7 And they had a few little fishes; and he blessed and set them before
them.
8 And they ate and were satisfied, and took up what remained of the
broken pieces, seven provision-baskets.84
Codex Sinaiticus:
9 And they were about four thousand; and he sent them away.
10 And immediately entering the ship with his disciples, he came into
the regions of Dalmanutha.
11 And the Pharisees came out and began to dispute with him,
seeking from him a sign from heaven, tempting him.
12 And sighing deeply in his spirit, he said: Why does this generation
seek for a sign? Verily I say to you: No sign shall be given to this
generation.
13 And leaving them he again embarked, and went to the other side.
14 And they had forgotten to take bread, and except one loaf they had
nothing with them in the ship.
15 And he charged them, saying: Take heed, beware of the leaven of
the Pharisees and of the leaven of Herod.
16 And they reasoned one with another: Because we have no bread.
17 And perceiving it he said to them: Why reason because you have
no bread? Do you not yet perceive, neither understand? Have you
your heart yet hardened?
18 Having eyes see you not, and having ears hear you not, and do you
not remember,
19 when I broke the five loaves among the five thousand, and how
many traveling-baskets full of broken pieces you took up? They say to
him: Twelve.
20 When the seven also among the four thousand, how many
provision-baskets full of broken pieces did you take up? And they
say: Seven.
21 And he said to them: Do you not yet understand?
22 And they come to Bethsaida And they bring to him a blind man,
and beseech him to touch him.
23 And taking the blind man by the hand, he brought him out of the
village; and having spit on his eyes, he laid his hands on him, and
asked him if he saw anything.
24 And he looked up and said: I behold men, for I perceive them as
trees walking.
25 Then he again laid his hands on his eyes; and he saw clearly and
was restored, and beheld all things distinctly.
26 And he sent him away to his house, saying: Go not into the village.
27 And Jesus and his disciples went forth into the villages of
Caesarea Philippi; and on the way he asked his disciples, saying to
them: Who do men say that I am?
28 They answered him, saying: John the Baptist, and others, Elijah,
but others, One of the prophets.
29 And he asked them: But you, who say you that I am? Peter
answering said to him: Thou art the Christ.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
85
30 And he charged them to tell no one concerning him.
31 And he began to teach them that the Son of man must suffer many
things, and be rejected by the elders, and the chief priests, and the
scribes, and be put to death, and rise after three days.
32 And he uttered this saying plainly. And Peter took him and began
to rebuke him.
33 But turning and looking on his disciples he rebuked Peter and
said: Get behind me, Satan, for thou thinkest not the things of God,
but the things of men.
34 And calling the multitude to him with his disciples, he said to
them: Whoever will follow after me, let him deny himself and take up
his cross, and follow me.
35 For whoever will save his life shall lose it; but whoever shall lose
his life for my sake and the gospel’s, shall save it.
36 For what shall it profit a man to gain the whole world and to lose
his life?
37 For what would a man give as a ransom for his life?
38 For whoever shall have been ashamed of me and of my words in
this adulterous and sinful generation, the Son of man shall also be
ashamed of him, when, he shall come in the glory of his Father with
the holy angels.
Mark 9
1 And he said to them: Verily I say to you that there are some of those
standing here, who shall not taste of death, till they see the kingdom
of God coming in power.
2 And after six days Jesus took with him Peter, and James, and John,
and led them up into a high mountain apart by themselves; and he
was transfigured before them;
3 And his clothing became shining, very white, as no fuller on earth
can whiten.
4 And there appeared to them Elijah with Moses; and they were
conversing with Jesus.
5 And Peter answering said to Jesus: Rabbi, it is good that we are
here, and let us make three tents, one for thee, and one for Moses,
and one for Elijah.
6 For he knew not what he should answer; for they were greatly
afraid.
7 And there came a cloud overshadowing them; and there came a
voice from the cloud: This is my beloved Son, hear him.
8 And suddenly looking around they no longer saw any one but Jesus
alone with themselves.86
Codex Sinaiticus:
9 And as they were coming down from the mountain, he charged
them that they should tell no one what things they had seen, unless
when the Son of man should have risen from the dead.
10 And they kept the saying among themselves, inquiring what to rise
from the dead is.
11 And they asked him, saying: Why say the Pharisees and the scribes
that Elijah must first come?
12 And he said to them: Elijah coming first restores all things. And
how is it written of the Son of man? that he must suffer many things,
and be set at naught.
13 But I say to you that Elijah also has come, and they have done to
him what things they wished, as it is written of him.
14 And coming to the disciples, they saw a great multitude about
them, and scribes disputing with them.
15 And immediately all the multitude seeing him were greatly
amazed, and running to him saluted him.
16 And he asked them: Why are you disputing with them?
17 And one from the multitude answered him: Teacher, I brought to
thee my son that has a dumb spirit.
18 And wherever he seizes him he throws him down; and he foams
and gnashes with his teeth and pines away; and I spoke to thy
disciples that they would cast him out, and they were not able.
19 And he answered and said to them: O faithless generation, how
long shall I be with you? how long shall I bear with you? Bring him to
me.
20 And they brought him to him. And when he saw him, the spirit
immediately threw him into convulsions, and he fell upon the
ground, and rolled foaming.
21 And he asked his father: How long is it since this came on him? He
replied: From a child;
22 And he has often thrown him into the fire and into the water, to
destroy him; but if in any way thou canst, have pity on us and help
us.
23 But Jesus said to him: What is this “If thou canst”? All things are
possible to him that believes.
24 The father of the child immediately crying out said: I believe; help
thou my unbelief.
25 But Jesus, seeing that the multitude was running together,
rebuked the unclean spirit, saying to him: Dumb and deaf spirit, I
charge thee, come out of him, and enter no more into him.
26 And after crying out and throwing him into strong convulsions he
came out; and he became like one dead, so that many said: He is
dead.
27 But Jesus took him by the hand and lifted him up, and he arose.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
87
28 And when he came into the house, his disciples asked him
privately: Why were we not able to cast him out?
29 And he said to them: This kind can come out by nothing but by
prayer.
30 And going out thence they passed along through Galilee, and he
wished that no one should know it;
31 For he taught his disciples and said to them that the Son of man is
to be delivered into the hands of men, and they will kill him, and
when he has been killed he will rise after three days.
32 But they understood not the saying, and were afraid to ask him.
33 And they came into Capernaum. And when he was in the house he
asked them: About what were you disputing on the way?
34 But they were silent; for they had disputed one with another on
the way who was greatest.
35 And he sat down and called the twelve, and said to them: If any
one will be first, he shall be last of all and minister of all.
36 And he took a little child and set him in the midst of them, and
took him in his arms and said to them:
37 Whoever shall receive one of these little children in my name,
receives me; and whoever shall receive me, receives not me, but him
that sent me.
38 John said to him: Teacher, we saw one casting out demons in thy
name, and he follows not us; and we forbade him, because he follows
not us.
39 But Jesus said: Forbid him not; for there is no one who shall do a
mighty deed in my name, and be able hastily to speak evil of me;
40 For he that is not against us, is for us.
41 For whoever shall give you a cup of water to drink in my name,
because you are Christ’s, verily I say to you, he shall not lose his
reward.
42 And whoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe, it
were better for him if an upper millstone were hung about his neck,
and he were thrown into the sea.
43 And if thy hand offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter
into life maimed, than having two hands to go away into hell, into the
unquenchable fire.
44 [no verse]
45 And if thy foot offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter
into life lame, than having two feet to be thrown into hell.
46 [no verse]
47 And if thy eye offend thee, pull it out: it is better for thee to enter
into the kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes to be
thrown into hell,
48 Where their worm dies not and the fire is not quenched.88
Codex Sinaiticus:
49 For every one shall be salted with fire.
50 Salt is good; but if the salt become saltless, by what means will
you season it? Have salt in yourselves, and be at peace one with
another.
Mark 10
1 And rising up he came thence into the borders of Judea and beyond
the Jordan; and multitudes came together again to him; and as he
was accustomed he again taught them.
2 And the Pharisees came and asked him if it is lawful for a man to
put away his wife, tempting him.
3 But answering he said to them: What did Moses command you?
4 They replied: Moses permitted to write a bill of divorce and put her
away.
5 But Jesus said to them: Because of the hardness of your heart he
wrote for you this commandment.
6 But from the beginning of creation, male and female made he
them;
7 For this cause shall a man leave his father and his mother,
8 And the two shall be one flesh: so no longer are they two, but one
flesh.
9 What therefore God has joined together, let not man put asunder.
10 And in the house the disciples again asked him about this matter.
11 And he said to them: Whoever puts away his wife and marries
another commits adultery against her;
12 And if she puts away her husband and marries another, she
commits adultery.
13 And they brought to him little children that he might touch them.
But the disciples rebuked those that brought them.
14 And Jesus seeing it was displeased, and said to them: Let the little
children come to me; forbid them not; for to such belongs the
kingdom of God.
15 Verily I say to you: Whoever shall not receive the kingdom of God
as a little child, shall in no way enter into it.
16 And he took them in his arms and blessed them much, putting his
hands upon them.
17 And as he went forth into the road, one ran to him, and kneeling to
him asked him: Good teacher, what shall I do that I may inherit
eternal life?
18 But Jesus said to him: Why callest thou me good? None is good
but one, God.
19 Thou knowest the commandments: Thou shalt not commit
adultery, Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt notThe H. T. Anderson New Testament
89
bear false testimony. Thou shalt not defraud, Honor thy father and
thy mother.
20 And he said to him: Teacher, all these have I kept from my youth.
21 And Jesus looking upon him loved him, and said to him: One
thing thou lackest: go, sell whatever thou hast, and give to the poor,
and thou shalt have treasure in heaven, and come follow me.
22 But becoming sad at that saying he went away sorrowful; for he
had great possessions.
23 And looking around, Jesus says to his disciples: How hardly shall
they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God.
24 And the disciples were amazed at his words. But Jesus again
answering says to them: Children, how hard it is to enter into the
kingdom of God:
25 it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a
rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.
26 But they were more amazed, saying among themselves: Who then
can be saved?
27 Looking on them, Jesus says: With men, impossible, but not with
God; for all things are possible with God.
28 Peter began to say to him: Behold, we have left all things and
followed thee.
29 Jesus replied: Verily I say to you, there is no one that has left
house, or brothers, or sisters, or mother, or father, or children, or
lands, for my sake and for the sake of the gospel,
30 But he shall receive a hundred fold now at this time, houses, and
brothers, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and land with
persecutions, and in the age to come eternal life.
31 But many first shall be last, and last first.
32 And they were in the road going up to Jerusalem; and Jesus was
going before them, and they were amazed; and as they followed they
were afraid. And taking the twelve aside again he began to tell them
the things that were about to befall him:
33 Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be
delivered to the chief of priests and the scribes, and they will
condemn him to death, and deliver him to the Gentiles,
34 And they shall mock him, and spit upon him, and scourge him,
and put him to death, and after three days he shall rise.
35 And there came to him James and John, the sons of Zebedee,
saying to him: Teacher, we wish that thou wouldst do for us whatever
we ask of thee.
36 And he said to them: What will you that I should do for you?
37 And they said to him: Grant to us that we may sit, one on thy right
hand and the other on thy left, in thy glory.90
Codex Sinaiticus:
38 But Jesus said to them: You know not what you ask. Are you able
to drink the cup that I drink, or be baptized with the baptism with
which I am baptized?
39 They said to him: We are able. Jesus said to them: The cup that I
drink you shall drink, and with the baptism with which I am baptized
you shall be baptized;
40 but to sit on my right hand or on my left is not mine to give, but it
shall be given to those for whom it has been prepared.
41 And when the ten heard they began to be displeased with James
and John.
42 And calling them to him, Jesus says to them: You know that those
who are accounted to rule the Gentiles exercise lordship over them,
and their great men exercise authority over them.
43 Not so however is it among you; but whoever will become great
among you, shall be your minister,
44 And whoever of you will become first, shall be servant of all.
45 For the Son of man came not to be ministered to, but to minister,
and to give his life a ransom for many.
46 And they come to Jericho. And as he went out from Jericho with
his disciples and a great multitude, Bartimaeus, the son of Timaeus, a
blind beggar, was sitting by the road.
47 And hearing that it was Jesus the Nazarene, he began to cry out
and say: Son of David, Jesus, have mercy on me.
48 And many rebuked him that he should be silent; but he cried
much more: Son of David, have mercy on me.
49 And Jesus stood and said: Call him. And they called the blind
man, saying to him: Take courage, rise, he calls thee.
50 And throwing aside the mantle, he sprang up and came to Jesus.
51 And answering him, Jesus said: What wilt thou that I shall do for
thee? And the blind man said to him: Rabboni, that I may receive
sight.
52 Jesus said to him: Go, thy faith has saved thee. And he
immediately received sight, and followed him in the way.
Mark 11
1 And when they drew near to Jerusalem, and to Bethany at the
mount of Olives, he sent two of his disciples
2 And said to them: Go into the village that is opposite to you, and,
immediately on entering it, you shall find a colt tied, on which no
man has ever yet sat: loose and bring him.
3 And if any one say to you: Why do you this? say: The Lord has need
of him, and he will immediately send him hither again.
4 And they went and found the colt tied at the door without at the
turn of the street, and they loosed him.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
91
5 And some of those standing there said to them: What do you
loosing the colt?
6 And they answered them as Jesus’ had said; and they gave them
permission.
7 And they brought the colt to Jesus, and threw their clothes upon
him, and he sat on him.
8 And many spread their mantles in the road, but others, bundles of
straw, having cut them from the fields.
9 And those that went before, and those that followed, cried:
Hosanna, blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord:
10 blessed is the coming kingdom of our father David: Hosanna in
the highest.
11 And he went into Jerusalem into the temple; and having looked
around on all things, the hour being now late, he went out to Bethany
with the twelve.
12 And, on the morrow, as they came out from Bethany, he was
hungry.
13 And seeing a fig-tree at a distance having leaves, he came if
perhaps he might find anything on it; and when he came to it he
found nothing but leaves; for it was not the season for figs.
14 And answering he said to it: No more for ever may any one eat
fruit from thee. And his disciples heard him.
15 And they came to Jerusalem. And entering into the temple he
began to drive out those that sold and those that bought in the
temple, and he overturned the tables of the money-changers, and the
seats of those that sold doves,
16 And permitted no one to carry a vessel through the temple;
17 and taught and said to them: Is it not written that my house shall
be called a house of prayer for all nations? But you have made it a
den of robbers.
18 And the chief priests and the scribes heard, and sought how they
might destroy him; for they feared him, for all the multitude were
astonished at his teaching.
19 And when it became late he went forth out of the city.
20 And as they passed by in the morning they saw the fig-tree
withered from the roots.
21 And Peter calling it to mind said to him: Rabbi, See, the fig-tree
that thou cursedst has withered.
22 And Jesus answered and said to them: Have faith in God.
23 Verily I say to you that whoever shall say to this mountain: Be
taken up and thrown into the sea, and shall not doubt in his heart,
but shall believe that what he says shall take place, it shall be done
for him.92
Codex Sinaiticus:
24 Wherefore I say to you, all things whatever you pray for and ask,
believe that you receive, and you shall have them.
25 And when you stand praying, forgive if you have any thing against
any one, that your Father who is in the heavens may forgive you your
offenses.
26 [no verse]
27 And they came again into Jerusalem. And as he was walking in the
temple, there came to him the chief priests and the scribes and the
elders,
28 and said to him: By what authority doest thou these things? Or
who gave thee this authority that thou shouldst do these things?
29 But Jesus said to them: I will ask you one word, and answer me,
and I will tell you by what authority I do these, things.
30 The baptism of John, was it of heaven or of men? Answer me.
31 And they reasoned among themselves, saying: If we say: Of
heaven, he will reply: Why then did you not believe him?
32 but shall we say: Of men, they feared the people; for all held John
that he was a prophet indeed.
33 And they answered Jesus and said: We know not. And Jesus said
to them: Neither tell I you by what authority I do these things.
Mark 12
1 And he began to speak to them in parables. A man planted a
vineyard, and put a hedge about it, and dug an under winevat and
built a tower, and let it out to vinedressers and went into another
country.
2 And at the time he sent to the vinedressers a servant, that he might
receive from the vinedressers of the fruits of the vineyard.
3 And they took him and scourged him, and sent him away empty.
4 And again he sent to them another servant; and they wounded him
in the head and dishonored him.
5 And he sent another; and him they killed, and many others,
scourging some, and killing some.
6 Yet one had he, a son beloved: he sent him to them last, saying:
They will reverence my son.
7 But those vinedressers said among themselves: This is the heir:
come, let us kill him, and the inheritance shall be ours.
8 And they took him and killed him, and cast him out of the vineyard.
9 What will the lord of the vineyard do? He will come and destroy the
vinedressers, and give the vineyard to others.
10 Have you not read this scripture? A stone that the builders
rejected, this became the head of the corner:
11 this was from the Lord, and it is wondrous in our eyes?The H. T. Anderson New Testament
93
12 And they sought to lay hold on him and feared the multitude: for
they knew that he had Spoken the parable against them. And leaving
him they went away.
13 And they send to him some of the Pharisees and of the Herodians,
that they may entrap him in a word.
14 And they come and say to him: Teacher, we know that thou art
true, and thou carest for no one; for thou lookest not on the person of
men, but teachest the way of God in truth. Is it lawful to give tribute
to Caesar or not? Must we give or not give?
15 But he, perceiving their hypocrisy, said to them: Why tempt me?
Bring me a denarius that I may see it.
16 They brought it. And he said to them: Whose image is this, and the
superscription? They said to him: Caesar’s.
17 And Jesus said to them: Return to Caesar the things that are
Caesar’s, and to God the things that are God’s. And they were
astonished at him.
18 And the Sadducees, who say that there is no resurrection, came to
him, and questioned him, saying:
19 Teacher, Moses wrote for us that, if any one’s brother die, and
leave a wife, and leave no child, his brother shall take his wife, and
raise up offspring for his brother.
20 There were seven brothers; and the first took a wife, and dying left
no offspring.
21 And the second took her, and died leaving no offspring; and the
third in like manner;
22 and the seven left no offspring. Last of all the woman also died.
23 In the resurrection, when they rise, of which of them shall she be
the wife? For the seven had her as a wife.
24 Jesus said to them: Do you not therefore err, not knowing the
scriptures, nor the power of God?
25 For when they rise from the dead, they neither marry nor are
given in marriage, but are as angels in the heavens.
26 But concerning the dead, that they do rise. Have you not read in
the book of Moses, at the Bush, how God spoke to him, saying: I am
the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob?
27 He is not the God of the dead, but of the living. You greatly err.
28 And one of the scribes came forward as he had heard them
disputing, and seeing that he had answered them well, he asked him:
Which is the first commandment of all?
29 Jesus answered him: The first is: Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God
is one Lord;
30 and thou shalt love the Lord thy God with thy whole heart, and
with thy whole soul, and with thy whole mind, and with thy whole
strength.94
Codex Sinaiticus:
31 The second is this: Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. There
is no other commandment greater than these.
32 And the scribe said to him: Teacher, in truth hast thou well said
that there is One, and there is no other beside him.
33 And to love him with the whole heart, and with the whole
understanding, and with the whole strength, and to love one’s
neighbor as himself is more than all whole burnt-offerings and
sacrifices.
34 And Jesus, seeing him that he had answered with understanding,
said to him: Not far art thou from the kingdom of God. And no one
any more ventured to ask him a question.
35 And Jesus answered and said, while teaching in the temple: How
say the scribes that Christ is the son of David?
36 David himself said in the Holy Spirit: The Lord said to my Lord:
Sit at my right hand till I make thy enemies thy footstool.
37 David himself calls him Lord; and whence is he his son? And the
great multitude heard him with pleasure.
38 And in his teaching he said; Beware of the scribes, who delight to
walk about in robes, and love salutations in the markets,
39 And the first seats in the synagogues, and the first reclining places
at suppers:
40 Who eat up widow’s houses and for a pretext make long prayers:
these shall receive greater condemnation.
41 And as he sat opposite the treasury, he was observing how the
multitude threw money into the treasury; and many rich men threw
in much;
42 And there came one poor widow and threw in two mites, which
make a farthing.
43 And calling his disciples to him, he said to them: Verily I say to
you that this poor widow has thrown in more than all that are
throwing into the treasury;
44 For all have thrown in out of their abundance; but she out of her
poverty has thrown in all that she had, her whole living.
Mark 13
1 And as he was going out of the temple, one of his disciples said to
him: Teacher, see what manner of stones, and what manner of
buildings.
2 And Jesus said to him: Seest thou these great buildings? There
shall not be left a stone upon a stone that shall not be thrown down.
3 And as he sat upon the mount of Olives opposite to the temple.
Peter and James and John and Andrew asked him privately:
4 Tell us, when shall these things be? And what the sign when all
these things shall be accomplished?The H. T. Anderson New Testament
95
5 And Jesus began to say to them: See that no one deceive you.
6 Many shall come in my name, saying: I am he, and shall deceive
many.
7 But when you hear of wars and rumors of wars, be not troubled:
they must take place, but not yet the end.
8 For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom:
there shall be earthquakes in various places, there shall be famines.
9 These are the beginning of pains. But see you to yourselves: they
shall deliver you up to councils, and in synagogues you shall be
beaten, and before governors and kings shall you stand for my sake,
for a testimony to them.
10 And among all nations shall the gospel first be preached.
11 And when they lead you delivering you up, be not anxious
beforehand what you shall speak; but whatever shall be given you in
that hour, this speak; for you are not the speakers, but the Holy
Spirit.
12 And brother shall deliver up brother to death, and the father the
child, and children shall rise up against parents and cause them to be
put to death.
13 And you shall be hated by all because of my name; but he that
endures to the end, he shall be saved.
14 But when you see the abomination of desolation standing where it
ought not (let the reader understand), then let those in Judea flee to
the mountains:
15 And he that is on the housetop let him not come down nor go in to
take any thing from his house:
16 And he that is in the field let him not turn back to take his mantle.
17 But alas for them that are with child, and them that give suck in
those days.
18 But pray that it may not take place in winter.
19 For those days shall be affliction, such as has not been from the
beginning of the creation, which God created, till now, and shall not
be.
20 And unless the Lord had shortened the days, no flesh would have
been saved; but because of the elect whom he has chosen he has
shortened the days.
21 And then, if any one say to you: Lo, here is Christ, lo there; believe
not.
22 But false Christs, and false prophets shall arise, and shall do signs
and wonders in order to deceive, if possible, the elect.
23 But do you beware: I have told you all things beforehand.
24 But in those days after that affliction the sun shall be darkened,
and the moon shall not give her light,96
Codex Sinaiticus:
25 And the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers which are in
the heavens shall be shaken.
26 And then shall they see the Son of man coming in clouds with
great power and glory.
27 And then shall he send the angels and gather the elect from the
four winds, from the end of earth to the end of heaven.
28 But learn the parable from the fig-tree. When its branch has now
become tender and put forth leaves, you know that summer is near:
29 So also you, when you see these things taking place, know that it
is near, at the doors.
30 Verily I say to you that this generation shall not pass away, till all
these things shall have been accomplished.
31 Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass
away.
32 But of that day or the hour no one knows, neither the angels in
heaven, nor the Son, but the Father.
33 Beware, watch; for you know not when the time is.
34 As a man, going to another country, left his house, and gave to his
servants authority, to each one his work, and commanded the
doorkeeper to watch.
35 Watch therefore; for you know not when the lord of the house
comes, whether in the evening, or at midnight, or at cock-crowing, or
in the morning:
36 Lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping.
37 But what I say to you, I say to all. Watch.
Mark 14
1 But after two days came the passover and the unleavened bread;
and the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might take him
by craft and put him to death;
2 For they said: Not on the feast, lest there be a tumult of the people.
3 And while he was in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, as he
reclined at table there came a woman having an alabaster box of
ointment of pure spikenard, very costly: after breaking the box she
poured it on his head.
4 But some expressed displeasure among themselves: Why was this
waste of the ointment made?
5 For this ointment could have been sold for more than three
hundred denarii and given to the poor; and they murmured against
her.
6 But Jesus said: Let her alone: why give her trouble? a good work
has she wrought on me.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
97
7 For the poor you have always with you, and when you will you can
do them good; but me you have not always.
8 What she could she has done: she has come beforehand to anoint
my body for the burial.
9 And verily I say to you, wherever the gospel shall be preached in
the whole world, this also that she has done shall be told for a
memorial of her.
10 And Judas Iscariot, who was one of the twelve, went away to the
chief priests that he might deliver him up to them.
11 And when they heard it they were glad, and promised to give him
money; and he sought how he might conveniently deliver him up.
12 And on the first day of unleavened bread, when they killed the
passover, his disciples say to him: Where wilt thou that we go and
make ready that thou mayest eat the passover?
13 And he sends two of his disciples and says to them: Go into the
city, and there shall meet you a man carrying a pitcher of water;
follow him,
14 and wherever he enters, say to the master of the house that the
Teacher says: Where is my guest-chamber where I may eat the
passover with my disciples?
15 And he will show you a large upper room furnished, ready: there
prepare for us.
16 And the disciples went out, and came into the city, and found as
he had said to them, and made ready the passover.
17 And when it was evening he comes with the twelve.
18 And as they reclined at table and ate, Jesus said: Verily I say to
you that one of you shall deliver me up, he that eats with me.
19 They began to be sad and to say to him one by one: Is it I?
20 But he said to them: one of the twelve, he that dips with me into
the dish.
21 For the Son of man goes, as it is written of him; but alas for that
man by whom the Son of man is delivered up: good were it for that
man if he had not been born.
22 And as they ate, having taken bread and blessed, he broke and
gave to them and said: Take: this is my body.
23 And having taken the cup and given thanks, he gave to them; and
they all drank of it.
24 And he said to them: This is my blood of the covenant, which is
poured out for many.
25 Verily I say to you that I will no more drink of the fruit of the vine,
till that day when I drink it new in the kingdom of God.
26 And they sung a hymn and went out into the mount of Olives.
27 And Jesus says to them: You all shall be offended; for it is written:
I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered.98
Codex Sinaiticus:
28 But after I have risen I will go before you into Galilee.
29 But Peter said to him: Though all should be offended, yet not I.
30 And Jesus says to him: Verily I say to thee that thou, this day, on
this night, before a cock shall have crowed twice, thou shalt deny me
three times.
31 But he said with vehemence: Though it should be necessary for me
to die with thee, I will in no way deny thee. And in like manner also
said they all.
32 And they come to a place, the name of which is Gethsemane; and
he says to his disciples: Sit here till I pray.
33 And he took with him Peter and James and John, and began to be
greatly amazed and in anguish,
34 And said to them: My soul is encompassed with sorrow even to
death: remain here and watch.
35 And going forward a little he fell on the ground, and prayed that if
it was possible the hour might pass away from him;
36 And he said: Abba, Father, all things are possible for thee; remove
this cup from me: yet not what I will, but what thou.
37 And he comes and finds them sleeping, and says to Peter: Simon,
sleepest thou? hadst thou not strength to watch one hour?
38 Watch and pray, lest you enter into I temptation. The spirit
indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.
39 And again he went away and prayed, saying the same word.
40 And he returned and found them sleeping again; for their eyes
were heavy; and they knew not what they should answer him.
41 And he comes the third time and says to them: Sleep the
remaining time, and rest; it is enough; the hour has come: behold,
the Son of man is delivered into the hands of sinners.
42 Rise, let us go: behold, he that delivers me up is at hand.
43 And immediately while he was yet speaking, comes Judas Iscariot,
one of the twelve, and with him a multitude with swords and clubs,
from the chief priests and the scribes and elders.
44 But he that delivered him up had given them a sign, saying:
Whomever I shall kiss, he it is: hold him fast, and lead him away
securely.
45 And when he had come he immediately came forward and said to
him: Rabbi, and kissed him;
46 And they laid hands on him and held him fast.
47 But some one of those standing by drew a sword, and smote the
servant of the chief priest, and cut off his ear.
48 And Jesus answered and said to them: As against a robber you
have come out with swords and clubs to take me.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
99
49 Daily was I with you in the temple teaching, and you did not lay
hold on me; but that the scriptures might be fulfilled.
50 And all left him and fled.
51 And one, a young man, followed him, having a linen cloth thrown
around his naked body; and they laid hold of him;
52 But he left the linen cloth and fled naked.
53 And they led Jesus away to the chief priests; and all the chief
priests and the elders and the scribes came together.
54 And Peter followed him at a distance, till within the court of the
chief priests; and he was sitting with the attendants, and warming
himself at the fire.
55 And the chief priests and the whole Sanhedrim sought testimony
against Jesus, to put him to death, and found none;
56 For many testified falsely against him, and their testimony did not
agree.
57 And some arose and testified falsely against him, saying:
58 We heard him say that I will destroy this temple that is made with
hands, and in three days build another made without hands.
59 And not even thus did their testimony agree.
60 And the chief priest arose in the midst and asked Jesus, saying:
Answerest thou nothing? What do these testify against thee?
61 But he was silent and answered nothing. Again the chief priest
asked him and said to him: Art thou the Christ, the Son of the
Blessed?
62 And Jesus said: I am; and you shall see the Son of man sitting on
the right hand of Power, and coming with the clouds of heaven.
63 And the chief priest rent his clothes and said: What further need
have we of witnesses?
64 You have heard the blasphemy: what think you? And they all
condemned him to be worthy of death.
65 And some began to spit upon him, and to cover his face, and to
strike him with the fist, and say to him: Prophesy; and the
attendants, striking him with the open hand, took him into custody.
66 And while Peter was below in the court, there came one of the
maidservants of the chief priest,
67 And seeing Peter warming himself, she looked on him and said:
Thou also wast with Jesus the Nazarene.
68 But he denied, saying: I neither know nor understand what thou
sayest. And he went forth without into the entrance, and a cock crew.
69 And the maidservant saw him and began again to say to those
standing by: This man is of them.
70 But he again denied. And after a little while again they that stood
by said to Peter: Truly thou art of them; for thou art a Galilean.100
Codex Sinaiticus:
71 But he began to call down curses on himself, and to swear: I know
not this man of whom you speak.
72 And immediately a second time a cock crew. And Peter
remembered the word as Jesus spoke to him: Before a cock shall
have crowed twice, thou shalt deny me three times. And when he
thought on it he wept.
Mark 15
1 And immediately in the morning, the chief priests, with the elders
and the scribes, and the whole Sanhedrim having prepared counsel,
bound Jesus and led him away, and delivered him to Pilate.
2 And Pilate asked him: Art thou the King of the Jews? And he
answered and said to him: Thou sayest.
3 And the chief priests accused him of many things.
4 And Pilate again asked him: Answerest thou nothing? See of how
many things they accuse thee,
5 But Jesus no longer answered any thing: so that Pilate wondered.
6 But at every feast he released to them one prisoner whom they
chose.
7 And there was one called Barabbas bound with the insurgents who,
in the insurrection, had committed murder.
8 And the multitude coming up began to ask that he would do as he
was accustomed to do for them.
9 And Pilate answered them, saying: Will you that I release to you the
King of the Jews?
10 For he knew that because of envy the chief priests had delivered
him up.
11 But the chief priests instigated the multitude that he should rather
release Barabbas to them.
12 And Pilate again answered and said to them: What then will you
that I shall do with him whom you call King of the Jews?
13 They again cried out: Crucify him.
14 But Pilate said to them: Why, what evil has he done? But they
cried out vehemently: Crucify him.
15 And Pilate, willing to satisfy the multitude, released to them
Barabbas, and delivered Jesus, after he had scourged him, to be
crucified.
16 And the soldiers led him away within the court, which is the
Pretorium, and called together the whole band.
17 And they clothed him in purple, and having plaited a crown of
thorns they put it on him:
18 And began to salute him: Hail, King of the Jews.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
101
19 And they struck his head with a reed, and spit upon him, and
bowing the knees they worshipped him.
20 And when they had derided him, they took off from him the
purple, and put on him his own clothes. And they led him out to
crucify him,
21 And they impressed one, Simon a Cyrenian, as he passed by
coming from the country, the father of Alexander and Rufus, to bear
his cross.
22 And they bring him to the place Golgotha, which is, when
translated, the place of a skull.
23 And they gave him wine mingled with myrrh; but he did not
receive it.
24 And they crucified him, and divided his garments among them,
casting a lot on them what each should take.
25 And it was the third hour, and they crucified him.
26 And the superscription of his accusation written on him was, THE
KING OF THE JEWS.
28 [no verse]
27 And with him they crucify two robbers, one on his right and one
on his left.
29 And they that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads and
saying: Aha, thou that destroyest the temple and buildest it in three
days,
30 Save thyself by coming down from the cross.
31 In like manner also the chief priests deriding among themselves
with the scribes said: Others he saved, himself he cannot save.
32 Christ the King of Israel, let him now come down from the cross,
that we may see and believe. And they that were crucified with him
reproached him.
33 And when the sixth hour had come, there came a darkness over
the whole land till the ninth hour.
34 And at the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice: Eloi, Eloi,
lema sabachthanei, which is, translated: My God, my God, why hast
thou forsaken me?
35 And some of those that stood by, hearing it, said: Lo, he calls for
Elijah.
36 But someone ran and filled a sponge with vinegar, and putting it
on a reed, gave him to drink, saying: Wait, let us see if Elijah is
coming to take him down.
37 But Jesus having uttered a loud cry expired.
38 And the veil of the temple was rent in two from top to bottom.
39 And the centurion that stood by opposite to him, seeing that he
thus expired, said: Truly this man was the Son of God.102
Codex Sinaiticus:
40 And there were women also looking on from a distance, among
whom were Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the
younger, and the mother of Jesus, and Salome;
41 Who, when he was in Galilee, followed him and ministered to him;
and many others came up with him to Jerusalem.
42 And evening having now come, because it was the preparation,
which is sabbath-eve,
43 Came Joseph who was of Arimathea, an honorable counselor, who
also himself was looking for the kingdom of God, and went in boldly
to Pilate, and asked for the body of Jesus.
44 But Pilate wondered if he were already dead; and calling to him
the centurion, he inquired if he had been dead any time;
45 And learning from the centurion, he gave the corpse to Joseph.
46 And he bought linen, took him down, wrapped him in the linen,
and laid him in a sepulcher that had been hewed out of a rock, and
rolled a stone to the door of the sepulcher.
47 And Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of Jesus saw where
he was laid.
Mark 16a
1 And when the sabbath had passed, Mary Magdalene and Mary the
mother of James, and Salome bought spices, that they might come
and anoint him.
2 And very early on the first of the week they came to the sepulcher,
the sun having risen.
3 And they said among themselves: Who shall roll away for us the
stone from the door of the sepulcher?
4 And looking up they see that the stone had been rolled away; for it
was very great.
5 And they entered the sepulcher and saw a young man, sitting at the
right side, clothed in a white robe; and they were amazed.
6 But he says to them: Be not amazed. You seek Jesus the Nazarene
who was crucified; he has risen, he is not here: see the place where
they laid him.
7 But go, tell his disciples, especially Peter, that he goes before you
into Galilee: there you shall see him, as he said to you.
8 And going out they fled from the sepulcher; for trembling and
astonishment had seized them; and they said nothing to any one, for
they were afraid.
Note:
According to Tischendorf, the remaining twelve verses were not
written by Mark. Codex Sinaiticus and Vaticanus have them not. The
learned reader can see the proof as given by Tischendorf. See, also,
Tregelles and Alford.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
103
The Longer Recension of Mark
According to the American Standard Version (1901)
(These verses do not appear in the Codex Sinaiticus)
Mark 16b
9. Now when he was risen early on the first day of the week, he
appeared first to Mary Magdalene, from whom he had cast out seven
demons.
10. She went and told them that had been with him, as they
mourned and wept.
11. And they, when they heard that he was alive, and had been seen
of her, disbelieved.
12. And after these things he was manifested in another form unto
two of them, as they walked, on their way into the country.
13. And they went away and told it unto the rest: neither believed
they them.
14. And afterward he was manifested unto the eleven themselves as
they sat at meat; and he upbraided them with their unbelief and
hardness of heart, because they believed not them that had seen him
after he was risen.
15. And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the
gospel to the whole creation.
16. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that
disbelieveth shall be condemned.
17. And these signs shall accompany them that believe: in my name
shall they cast out demons; they shall speak with new tongues;
18. they shall take up serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing, it
shall in no wise hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they
shall recover.
19. So then the Lord Jesus, after he had spoken unto them, was
received up into heaven, and sat down at the right hand of God.
20. And they went forth, and preached everywhere, the Lord
working with them, and confirming the word by the signs that
followed. Amen.104
Codex Sinaiticus:
According to Luke
Luke 1
1 Since many have undertaken to draw up a narrative of the matters
that have been fully accomplished among us,
2 as those, who, from the beginning became eyewitnesses and
ministers of the word, delivered them to us,
3 it seemed good to me also, after having accurately traced all things
from the first, to write them in order for thee, most noble
Theophilus,
4 that thou mightst know the certainty of the words concerning
which thou hast been instructed.
5 There was in the days of Herod king of Judea a priest, named
Zachariah, of the class of Abijah, and his wife was of the daughters of
Aaron, and her name was Elizebeth.
6 And they were both righteous before God, walking in all the
commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless.
7 And they had no child, because Elizebeth was barren, and both
were advanced in their days.
8 But it came to pass while he acted as priest, in the order of his
class, before God,
9 according to the custom of the priesthood his lot was to burn
incense when he went into the temple of the Lord;
10 and all the multitude of the people were praying without at the
hour of incense.
11 And there appeared to him an angel of the Lord, standing on the
right side of the altar of incense.
12 And Zachariah was troubled when he saw him, and fear fell upon
him.
13 But the angel said to him: Fear not, Zachariah, for thy prayer is
heard, and thy wife Elizebeth shall bear thee a son; and thou shalt
call his name John;
14 and thou shalt have joy and gladness, and many shall rejoice at his
birth.
15 For he shall be great before the Lord, and wine and strong drink
he shall by no means drink, and he shall be filled with the Holy Spirit
even from his mother’s womb;
16 and many of the sons of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God;
17 and he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elijah, to turn
the hearts of fathers to children, and the disobedient to the wisdom
of the just, to make ready for the Lord a people prepared.
18 And Zachariah said to the angel: By what means shall 1 know this?
for I am an aged man, and my wife is advanced in her days.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
105
19 And the angel answered and said to him: I am Gabriel that stand
in the presence of God, and I am sent to speak to thee, and bring thee
these good tidings.
20 And behold, thou shalt be dumb and not able to speak, till the day
in which these things shall be accomplished, because thou didst not
believe my words, which shall be fulfilled in their time.
21 And the people were waiting for Zachariah, and wondered that he
stayed so long in the temple.
22 But when he came out he was not able to speak to them; and they
perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple; and he made signs
to them, and remained speechless.
23 And it came to pass when the days of his service were completed,
he departed to his house.
24 And after those days his wife Elizebeth conceived, and hid herself
five months, saying:
25 Thus has the Lord dealt with me in the days in which he looked on
me to take away my reproach among men.
26 And in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God to a
city of Galilee, named Nazareth,
27 to a virgin betrothed to a man, whose name was Joseph, of the
house of David; and the name of the virgin was Mary.
28 And coming in to her, the angel said: Hail, highly favored, the
Lord is with thee.
29 But she was troubled at the word, and was reasoning what
manner of salutation this could be.
30 And the angel said to her: Fear not, Mary; for thou hast found
favor with God.
31 And behold, thou shalt conceive in the womb and bear a son, and
thou shalt call his name Jesus.
32 He shall be great, and Son of the Highest shall he be called; and
the Lord God shall give him the throne of David his father,
33 and he shall reign over the house of Jacob forever, and of his
kingdom there shall be no end.
34 But Mary said to the angel: How shall this be, seeing I know not a
man?
35 And the angel answered and said to her: The Holy Spirit shall
come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow
thee: wherefore also the holy one that is born shall be called the Son
of God.
36 And behold, thy relative Elizebeth, she also has conceived a son in
her old age; and this is the sixth month with her that is called barren:
37 for no word from God shall be impossible.
38 And Mary said: Behold the handmaid of the Lord: let it be done
for me according to thy word. And the angel departed from her.106
Codex Sinaiticus:
39 And Mary arose in those days and went into the mountainous
country with haste to a city of Judah,
40 and entered the house of Zachariah, and saluted Elizebeth.
41 And it came to pass when Elizebeth heard the salutation of Mary,
the babe in her womb leaped. And Elizebeth was filled with the Holy
Spirit,
42 and spoke out with a loud cry, and said: Blessed art thou among
women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb.
43 And whence is this to me that the mother of my Lord should
come, to me?
44 For behold, as the voice of thy salutation came into my ears, the
babe in my womb leaped with joy.
45 And blessed is she who believed that there shall be a fulfillment of
the things spoken to her from the Lord.
46 And Mary said: My soul magnifies the Lord,
47 and my spirit rejoiced in God my Saviour,
48 because he looked upon the lowly condition of his handmaid. For
behold, from this time shall all generations call me blessed,
49 because the mighty One has done great things for me. And holy is
his name;
50 and his mercy is from generation to generation on them that fear
him.
51 He has shown might with his arm; he has scattered the proud in
the understanding of their heart:
52 he has cast down the mighty from thrones, and exalted the lowly:
53 the poor has he filled with good things and the rich has he sent
empty away.
54 He has helped Israel his servant, by remembering mercy,
55 (as he spoke to our fathers), to Abraham and to his posterity
forever.
56 And Mary remained with her about three months, and returned to
her house.
57 But the time for Elizebeth to bring forth was completed, and she
bore a son.
58 And her neighbors and relatives heard that the Lord had
magnified his mercy to her and they rejoiced with her.
59 And it came to pass on the eighth day that they came to
circumcise the child, and they called it by the name of its father,
Zachariah.
60 And its mother answered and said: No; but it shall be called John.
61 And they said to her: There is no one of thy kindred that is called
by this name.
62 And they made signs to his father what he would have him called.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
107
63 And having asked for a writing tablet, he wrote, saying: His name
is John. And they all wondered.
64 But his mouth was immediately opened and his tongue loosed,
and he spoke, blessing God.
65 And fear came on all that dwelt about them; and all these things
were much talked of in all the mountainous country of Judea;
66 and all that heard laid them up in their heart, saying: What then
will this child be? for the hand of the Lord was with him.
67 And Zachariah his father was filled with the Holy Spirit, and
prophesied, saying:
68 Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, because he has visited and
redeemed his people;
69 and has raised up for us, in the house of David his servant, a horn
of salvation,
70 as he spoke through the mouth of his holy prophets of ancient
times,
71 salvation from our enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us,
72 to show mercy to our fathers, and to remember his holy covenant,
73 the oath that he swore to Abraham our father, to grant to us
74 that being delivered from the hand of enemies we might serve him
without fear,
75 in holiness and righteousness before him all our days.
76 And thou also, O child, shalt be called prophet of the Highest; for
thou shalt go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways,
77 to give to his people the knowledge of salvation in remission of
their sins,
78 through the tender mercies of our God, in which the dawn from
on high has visited us,
79 to give light to them that sit in darkness and the shadow of death,
to guide our feet into the way of peace.
80 And the child grew and became strong in spirit, and was in the
deserts till the day of his manifestation to Israel.
Luke 2
1 But it came to pass in those days, there went out a decree from
Caesar Augustus, that all the habitable land should be enrolled.
2 This enrollment took place first when Cyrenius was governor of
Syria.
3 And all went to be enrolled, each one to his own city.
4 And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth,
into Judea, to the city of David, which is called Bethlehem, because
he was of the house and family of David,108
Codex Sinaiticus:
5 to be enrolled with Mary who was betrothed to him, being with
child.
6 And it came to pass while they were there, the days for her to bring
forth were completed;
7 and she brought forth her son the firstborn, and swathed him, and
laid him in a stall, because there was no place for them in the inn.
8 And there were in the same country shepherds living in the fields,
and keeping guard over their flock during the watches of the night.
9 And an angel of the Lord stood by them, and the glory of the Lord
shone round about them, and they were afraid with great fear.
10 And the angel said to them: Fear not; for behold, I bring you glad
tidings of great joy, which shall be for all the people;
11 for there is born to you this day, in the city of David, a Saviour,
who is Christ the Lord.
12 And this shall be a sign to you: you shall find a babe swathed in a
stall.
13 And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly
host praising God and saying:
14 Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace among men of his
good pleasure.
15 And it came to pass when the angels had gone away from them
into heaven, the shepherds said one to another: Let us go now to
Bethlehem, and see this thing that has come to pass, which the Lord
has made known to us.
16 And they came in haste, and found both Mary and Joseph, and the
babe lying in the stall.
17 And when they had seen it, they made known concerning this
thing that had been told them of this child.
18 And all that heard were astonished at the things told to them by
the shepherds.
19 But Mary kept all these words, pondering them in her heart.
20 And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all
things that they had heard and seen as it had been told to them.
21 And when eight days had been completed for circumcising him,
his name was also called Jesus, as it had been called by the angel
before he had been conceived in the womb.
22 And when the days of their purification had been completed,
according to the law of Moses, they brought him up to Jerusalem to
present him to the Lord,
23 as it is written in the law of the Lord: Every male that opens the
womb shall be called holy to the Lord;
24 and to offer a sacrifice according to what is said in the law of the
Lord, a pair of doves or two young pigeons.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
109
25 And behold, there was a man in Jerusalem, whose name was
Simeon; and this man was just and devout, waiting for the
consolation of Israel, and the Holy Spirit was upon him:
26 and it had been revealed to him by the Holy Spirit that he should
not see, death, before he had seen the Lord’s anointed.
27 And he came in the Spirit into the temple; and when the parents
brought in the child Jesus that they might do for him according to
the custom of the law,
28 he also took him into his arms, and blessed God and said:
29 Now, Lord, lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to
thy word, 30 for my eyes have seen thy salvation,
31 which thou hast prepared before the face of all the people,
32 a light for a revelation to the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people
Israel.
33 And his father and his mother were wondering at the things
spoken concerning him.
34 And Simeon blessed them and said to Mary his mother: Behold,
this is set for the fall and rise of many in Israel, and for a sign to be
spoken against.
35 And a sword shall pass through thy soul also that thoughts may be
revealed out of many hearts.
36 There was also Anna a prophetess, a daughter of Phanuel, of the
tribe of Asher: she was advanced in many days, having lived with a
husband seven years from her virginity,
37 and she was a widow till eighty-four years, who departed not from
the temple, serving day and night with fastings and prayers.
38 And coming in at the same hour, she gave thanks to God, and
spoke of him to all that looked for the redemption of Jerusalem.
39 And when they had accomplished all things according to the law
of the Lord, they returned to Galilee to their own city Nazareth.
40 And the child grew and became strong, being filled with wisdom,
and the grace of God was upon him.
41 And his parents went yearly to Jerusalem at the feast of passover.
42 And when he was twelve years of age, they having gone up
according to the custom of the feast,
43 and having completed the days, on their return the child Jesus
remained in Jerusalem, and his parents knew it not.
44 But supposing that he was in the company, they went a day’s
journey, and sought for him among the relatives and the
acquaintances,
45 and not finding him, they returned to Jerusalem seeking for him.
46 And it came to pass after three days they found him in the temple,
sitting in the midst of the teachers, both hearing them and asking
them questions;110
Codex Sinaiticus:
47 and all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and
answers.
48 And when they saw him they were amazed, and his mother said to
him: Child, why hast thou dealt with us thus? Behold, thy father and
I have sought thee, sorrowing.
49 And he said to them: Why is it that you sought me? Did you not
know that I must be about my Father’s business?
50 And they understood not the word that he spoke to them.
51 And he went down with them and came to Nazareth, and was
subject to them. And his mother kept all the words in her heart.
52 And Jesus increased in wisdom and age, and in favor with God
and men.
Luke 3
1 But in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius
Pilate being governor of Judea, and Herod tetrarch of Galilee, and
Philip his brother tetrarch of Iturea and of the region of Trachonitis,
and Lysanias tetrarch of Abilene,
2 in the days of the chief priest Annas and of Caiaphas, the word of
God came to John the son of Zachariah in the wilderness;
3 and he came into all the region round about the Jordan, preaching
the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins,
4 as it is written in the book of the words of Isaiah the prophet: The
voice of one crying in the wilderness: Prepare the way of the Lord,
make his paths straight:
5 every ravine shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be
brought low, and the crooked places shall be made straight, and the
rough ways smooth,
6 and all flesh shall see the salvation of God.
7 He said therefore to the multitudes that came out to be baptized by
him: Brood of vipers, who warned you to flee from the coming
wrath?
8 Bring forth then fruits worthy of repentance, and begin not to say
within yourselves: We have Abraham as a father; for I say to you that
God is able from these stones to raise up children for Abraham.
9 And now also the ax is lying at the root of the trees: every tree
therefore that brings not forth good fruit is cut down and thrown into
the fire.
10 And the multitudes asked him, saying: What then shall we do?
11 And he answered and said to them: He that has two coats let him
give to him that has none, and he that has food let him do in like
manner.
12 And publicans also came to be baptized, and said to him: Teacher,
what shall we do?The H. T. Anderson New Testament
111
13 And he said to them: Exact no more than that which has been
appointed to you.
14 And soldiers also asked, saying: What shall we also do? And he
said to them: Do violence to no one, accuse no one falsely, and be
content with your wages.
15 But while the people were in expectation, and all were reasoning
in their hearts concerning John, whether he were the Christ or not,
16 John answered, saying to them all: I indeed baptize you in water;
but there comes he that is mightier than I, the strap of whose sandals
I am not worthy to loose; he shall baptize you in the Holy Spirit and
fire:
17 whose winnowing-shovel is in his hand to thoroughly cleanse his
threshing-floor, and gather the grain into his granary; but the chaff
he will burn up with unquenchable fire.
18 With many other exhortations then indeed preached he the gospel
to the people;
19 but Herod the tetrarch being reproached by him concerning
Herodias the wife of his brother, and concerning all the wicked
things which Herod had done,
20 added this also to them all; he shut up John in prison.
21 But it came to pass that while all the people were baptized, Jesus
also having been baptized, and praying, the heaven was opened,
22 and the Holy Spirit came down, in a bodily form like a dove, upon
him, and a voice came from heaven: Thou art my beloved Son, in
thee I am well pleased,
23 And Jesus himself was, when he began his ministry, about thirty
years old, being, as was supposed, the son of Joseph, son of Heli,
24 son of Matthat, son of Levi, son: of Malchi, son of Jannai, son of
Joseph,
25 son of Mattithiah, son: of Amos, son of Nahum, son of Esli, son of
Naggai,
26 son of Maath, son of Mattithiah, son of Shimei, son of Joseph, son
of Joda,
27 son of Jonan, son of Rhesa, son of Zerubbabel, son of Shealtiel,
son of Neri,
28 son of Malchi, son of Addi, son of Cosam, son of Elmaam, son of
Er,
29 son of Jesus, son of Eliezer, son of Jorim, son of Matthat, son of
Levi,
30 son of Symeon, son of Judah, son of Joseph, son of Jonam, son of
Eliakim,
31 son of Melea, son of Menna, son of Mattatha, son of Nathan, son
of David,112
Codex Sinaiticus:
32 son of Jesse, son of Obed, son of Boaz, son of Salmon, son of
Nahshon,
33 son of Aminadab, son of Admin, son of Ami, son of Hezron, son of
Pharez, son of Judah,
34 son of Jacob, son of Isaac, son of Abraham, son of Terah, son of
Nahor,
35 son of Serug, son of Reu, son of Peleg, son of Heber, son of Shelah,
36 son of Kenan, son of Arphaxad, son of Shem, son of Noah, son of
Lamech,
37 son of Methusaleh, son of Enoch, son of Jared, son of Mahalaleel,
son of Kenan,
38 son of Enos, son of Seth, son of Adam, son of God.
Luke 4
1 But Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan, and
was led in the Spirit into the wilderness forty days, tempted by the
devil. And he ate nothing in those days, and when they were ended
he was hungry.
3 And the devil said to him: If thou art the Son of God, speak to this
stone that it may become bread.
4 And Jesus answered to him: It is written that not by bread alone
shall man live.
5 And having led him up, he showed him all the kingdoms of the
world in a moment of time.
6 And the devil said to him: To thee will I give all this authority and
the glory of them, for to me it is delivered; and to whomever I will I
give it:
7 if therefore thou wilt worship before me, all shall be thine.
8 And Jesus answered and said to him: It is written: Thou shalt
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve,
9 And he brought him to Jerusalem, and set him on the wing of the
temple, and said to him: If thou art the Son of God, cast thyself down
hence;
10 for it is written that he shall give his angels charge concerning thee
to guard thee safely;
11 and in their hands they shall take thee up, lest perhaps thou strike
thy foot against a stone.
12 And Jesus answered and said to him: It is said: Thou shalt not put
the Lord thy God to the proof.
13 And when the devil had ended all the temptation he departed from
him for a time.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
113
14 And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee; and a
fame concerning him went forth through all that surrounding
country.
15 And he taught in their synagogues, glorified by all.
16 And he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up, and
went, according to his custom, into the synagogue on the sabbath
day, and stood up to read.
17 And there was given to him the book of the prophet Isaiah; and
having unrolled the book he found the place where it is written:
18 The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to
preach the gospel to the poor; he has sent me
19 to preach deliverance to the captives and recovering of sight to the
blind; to set at liberty the bruised, to preach the acceptable year of
the Lord.
20 And having rolled up the book and given it back to the attendant,
he sat down; and the eyes of all in the synagogue were fixed upon
him.
21 And he began to say to them: This day is fulfilled this Scripture in
your ears.
22 And all applauded him and wondered at the words of grace that
proceeded out of his mouth, and said: Is not this the son of Joseph?
23 And he said to them: You will surely speak this parable to me:
Physician, heal thyself; whatever things we heard were done in
Capernaum, do also here in thy country.
24 But he said: Verily I say to you, that no prophet is accepted in his
own country.
25 And I tell you in truth that there were many widows in Israel in
the days of Elijah, when the heaven was shut up for three years and
six months, when there came a great famine on the whole land:
26 and to no one of them was Elijah sent but to Sarepta of Sidon, to a
woman a widow.
27 And there were many lepers in Israel in the days of Elisha the
prophet, and no one of them was cleansed but Naaman the Syrian.
28 And all in the synagogue, on hearing these things, were filled with
anger,
29 and rose up and thrust him out of the city, and brought him to the
brow of the mount on which their city was built, so as to cast him
down headlong;
30 but passing through the midst of them, he went away.
31 And he came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and taught
them on the sabbaths;
32 and they were amazed at his teaching, for his word was with
authority.114
Codex Sinaiticus:
33 And in the synagogue there was a man that had a spirit of an
unclean demon, and he cried out with a great voice:
34 Aha, what have we to do with thee, Jesus the Nazarene? Hast thou
come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art, the holy one of God.
35 And Jesus rebuked him, saying: Be silent and come out of him.
And the demon threw him into the midst and came out of him, and
hurt him in no way.
36 And amazement came upon all, and they spoke one to another,
saying: What a word is this, that with authority and power he
commands the unclean spirits, and they come out?
37 And there went forth a rumor concerning him into every place of
the surrounding country.
38 And rising up from the synagogue, he entered into the house of
Simon. And Simon’s mother-in-law was confined with a great fever;
and they besought him for her.
39 And standing over her he rebuked the fever, and it left her; and
she immediately rose and ministered to them.
40 But when the sun had gone down, all, as many as had any sick
with various diseases, brought them to him; and he laid his hands on
each one of them and cured them.
41 And demons also went forth from many, crying out and saying:
Thou art the Son of God. And rebuking them, he permitted them not
to speak, for they knew that he was the Christ.
42 But when it was day he went out and departed to a desert place;
and the multitudes sought for him: and they came to him, and
endeavored to detain him that he might not go away from them.
43 But he said to them: I must preach the kingdom of God to the
other cities also, because for this was I sent.
44 And he preached in the synagogues of Galilee.
Luke 5
1 But it came to pass while the multitude pressed upon him and
heard the word of God, he was standing by the lake of Gennesaret,
2 and saw two ships standing by the lake; but the fishermen had gone
out of them and had washed the nets.
3 And entering into one of the ships, which was Simon’s, he asked
him to put out a little from the land; and sitting down in the ship he
taught the multitudes.
4 But when he ceased speaking, he said to Simon: Put out into the
deep, and let down your nets for a draught.
5 And Simon answered and said: Master, through the whole night
have we toiled and taken nothing; yet at thy word I will let down the
nets.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
115
6 And when they had done this, they enclosed a great number of
fishes; and their nets began to break.
7 And they made signs to the partners in the other ship that they
should come and help them; and they came, and filled both ships, so
that they began to sink.
8 But Simon Peter, seeing it, fell at the knees of Jesus, saying: Depart
from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord.
9 For amazement had seized on him and all that were with him, at
the draught of fishes that they had taken;
10 and in like manner also on James and John, sons of Zebedee, who
were partners with Simon. And Jesus said to Simon: Fear not: from
this time thou shalt catch men.
11 And they drew the ships to land, left all and followed him.
12 And it came to pass while he was in one of the cities, behold, a
man full of leprosy; and seeing Jesus, he fell on his face and besought
him, saying: Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.
13 And he, stretched forth his hand and touched him, saying: I will;
be clean. And immediately the leprosy departed from him.
14 And he charged him to tell no one; but go, show thyself to the
priest, and offer for thy cleansing as Moses commanded, for a
testimony to them.
15 But the more there went abroad the report concerning him; and
many multitudes came together to hear, and to be cured of their
infirmities.
16 But he withdrew into the deserts, and prayed.
17 And it came to pass on one of the days that he was teaching, and
there were sitting Pharisees and teachers of the law, who had come
out of every village of Galilee and Judea, and from Jerusalem; and
the power of the Lord was present that he might heal.
18 And behold, men bringing on a bed a man who was a paralytic;
and they sought to bring him in and lay him before him.
19 And not finding by what way they could bring him in be cause of
the multitude, they went up on the housetop, and through the tiling
let him down with the bed into the midst before Jesus.
20 And seeing their faith he said: Man, thy sins are forgiven thee.
21 And the scribes and the Pharisees began to reason, saying: Who is
this that speaks blasphemies? Who is able to forgive sins but God
alone?
22 But Jesus perceiving their reasonings, answered and said to them:
Why reason in your hearts?
23 Which is easier, to say: Thy sins are forgiven thee, or to say: Arise
and walk?116
Codex Sinaiticus:
24 But that you may know that the Son of man has authority on earth
to forgive sins, he said to the paralytic: I say to thee, Rise, and take
up thy bed, and go to thy house.
25 And he immediately rose up before them, took up that on which
he had lain, and went away to his house glorifying God.
26 And astonishment seized on them all; and they glorified God, and
were filled with fear, saying: We have seen strange things today.
27 And after these things he went out, and saw a publican named
Levi sitting at the custom-house, and said to him: Follow me.
28 And leaving all, he arose and followed him.
29 And Levi made him a great feast in his house; and there was a
great multitude of publicans and others who were reclining at table
with them.
30 And the Pharisees and their scribes murmured against his
disciples, saying: Why do you eat and drink with publicans and
sinners?
31 And Jesus answered and said to them: They that have health have
no need of a physician, but they that are sick;
32 I have not come to call righteous men, but sinners, to repentance.
33 And they said to him: The disciples of John fast often and make
prayers; likewise also those of the Pharisees; but thine eat and drink.
34 But Jesus said to them: Can you make the sons of the
bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom is with them?
35 But days will come; and when the bridegroom shall have been
taken away from them, then shall they fast in those days.
36 And he spoke also a parable to them: No one tears a piece from a
new garment and puts it on an old garment; otherwise, both the new
makes a rent, and the piece that is from the new agrees not with the
old.
37 And no one puts new wine into old bottles; otherwise, the new
wine bursts the bottles, and itself is spilled, and the bottles perish;
38 but new wine must be put into new bottles.
39 And no one after drinking old, desires new; for he says: The old is
good.
Luke 6
1 And it came to pass, on the first sabbath after the second day of the
feast, that he went through the fields of grain, and his disciples
pulled the ears of grain and ate, rubbing them in their hands.
2 But some of the Pharisees said: Why do you that which it is not
lawful to do on the sabbath?
3 And Jesus answered and said to them: Have you not read this that
David did, when he was hungry, himself and those that were with
him?The H. T. Anderson New Testament
117
4 How he entered into the house of God, and took the loaves of the
presence, and ate and gave also to those that were with him, which it
is not lawful to eat but for the priests alone?
5 And he said to them: The Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath.
6 And it came to pass on another sabbath that he went into the
synagogue and taught. And a man was there, and his right hand was
withered.
7 And the scribes and Pharisees watched him if he would cure on the
sabbath, that they might find an accusation against him.
8 But he knew their thoughts; and he said to the man that had the
withered hand: Rise and stand in the midst. And he arose and stood.
9 And Jesus said to them: I ask you if it is lawful on the sabbath to do
good or to do evil, to save life or to destroy.
10 And looking around on them all, he said to him: Stretch forth thy
hand. And he did so, and his hand was restored.
11 But they were filled with madness, and conferred one with another
what they should do to Jesus.
12 And it came to pass in these days that he went into the mountain
to pray; and he spent the night in prayer to God.
13 And when day had come, he called to him his disciples, and having
chosen from among them twelve, whom he also named apostles,
14 Simon, whom he also named Peter, and Andrew his brother, and
James and John, and Philip and Bartholomew,
15 and Matthew and Thomas, and James son of Alphaeus, and Simon
who is called Zealot,
16 and Judas brother of James, and Judas Iscariot who became a
traitor;
17 and having come down with them he stood in a plain; and a great
multitude of his disciples, and a great number of the people from all
Judea and Jerusalem, and the seacoast of Tyre and Sidon, who had
come to hear him and to be cured of their diseases;
18 and those oppressed by unclean spirits were cured;
19 and all the multitude sought to touch him, for power went forth
from him and cured all.
20 And he lifted up his eyes upon his disciples and said: Blessed are
you poor, for yours is the kingdom of God.
21 Blessed are you that hunger now, for you shall be filled. Blessed
are you that weep now, for you shall laugh.
22 Blessed are you when men shall hate you, and when they shall
shut you out from their society, and shall reproach you, and cast your
name out as evil for the sake of the Son of man.
23 Rejoice in that day and leap for joy; for behold, your reward is
great in heaven; for so did their fathers to the prophets.
24 But alas for you that are rich, for you have your consolation in full.118
Codex Sinaiticus:
25 Alas for you that are filled now, for you shall be hungry. Alas for
you that laugh now, for you shall mourn and weep.
26 Alas when all men shall speak well of you; for so did their fathers
to the false prophets.
27 But I say to you that hear: Love your enemies: do good to them
that hate you,
28 bless them that curse you; pray for them that insult you.
29 To him that smites thee on the cheek offer the other also; and
from him that takes from thee thy mantle, thy coat also withhold not.
30 Give to every one that asks of thee; and from him that takes away
thy goods ask them not again.
31 And as you would that men should do to you, do you also to them
in like manner.
32 And if you love them that love you, what thanks have you? for
sinners love those that love them.
33 For if you do good to those that do good to you, what thanks have
you? even sinners do the same.
34 And if you lend to those of whom you hope to receive, what thanks
have you? even sinners lend to sinners that they may receive the
same.
35 But love your enemies and do good and lend, hoping for nothing
in return; and your reward shall be great, and you shall be sons of the
Highest; for he is kind to the unthankful and the evil.
36 Become merciful, as your Father is merciful.
37 And judge not, and you shall not be judged; and condemn not,
and you shall not be condemned. Release, and you shall be released;
38 give, and it shall be given to you; good measure, pressed down,
shaken together, running over, shall they give into your lap; for with
what measure you measure it shall be measured to you again.
39 And he spoke also a parable to them: Can a blind man lead a blind
man? will not both fall into a pit?
40 A disciple is not above the teacher; but every one thoroughly
instructed shall be as his teacher.
41 And why beholdest thou l the splinter that is in thy brother’s eye,
but considerest not the beam that is in thy own eye?
42 How canst thou say to thy brother: Brother, let me pull out the
splinter that is in thy eye, thyself not beholding the beam in thy eye?
Hypocrite, pull first the beam out of thy eye, and then thou shalt see
clearly to pull out the splinter that is in thy brother’s eye.
43 For there is no good tree that produces corrupt fruit; nor again a
corrupt tree that produces good fruit.
44 For every tree is known by its own fruit; for not from thorns
collect they figs, neither from a bramble bush gather they grapes.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
119
45 The good man, out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth
that which is good; and the evil man, out of the evil treasury, brings
forth that which is evil. For out of the abundance of the heart his
mouth speaks.
46 But why call me: Lord, Lord, and do not the things that I say?
47 Every one that comes to me and hears my words and does them, I
will show you to whom he is like.
48 He is like a man building a house, who dug and deepened, and
laid a foundation on the rock; and when a flood came, the stream
dashed against that house, and had not strength to shake it; because
it was well built.
49 But he that hears and does not, is like a man that without a
foundation built a house on the earth, against which the stream
dashed, and it immediately fell in heaps; and the ruin of that house
was great.
Luke 7
1 After he had finished all his sayings in the ears of the people, he
entered into Capernaum.
2 And a certain centurion’s servant that was dear to him, being sick,
was about to die.
3 But hearing of Jesus, he sent to him elders of the Jews, asking him
that he would come and save his servant.
4 And they came to Jesus and asked him earnestly, saying: He is
worthy for whom thou shalt do this:
5 for he loves our nation, and has himself built for us the synagogue.
6 And Jesus went with them. But when he was now not far from the
house, the centurion sent friends, saying: Lord, trouble not thyself;
for I am hot worthy that thou shouldst come in under my roof;
7 wherefore neither thought I myself worthy to come to thee; but say
in a word, and let my servant be restored to health.
8 For I am a man placed under authority, having soldiers under me;
and I say to this one: Go, and he goes; and to another: Come, and he
comes; and to my servant: Do this, and he does it.
9 And when Jesus heard these things he was astonished at him; and
turning, he said to the multitude that followed him: I say to you, not
even in Israel have I found so great faith.
10 And those that had been sent returned to the house and found the
servant well.
11 And it came to pass on the following day he went to a city called
Nain; and there went with him many of his disciples and a great
multitude.120
Codex Sinaiticus:
12 And when he came near the gate of the city, behold, there was
carried out dead an only-born son of his mother, and she was a
widow; and a great multitude of the city was with her.
13 And seeing her, the Lord had pity on her, and said to her: Weep
not.
14 And coming forward he touched the bier; and those that bore it
stopped; and he said: Young man, I say to thee. Arise.
15 And the dead man sat up and began to speak; and he gave him to
his mother.
16 And fear seized them all, and they glorified God, saying: A great
prophet has risen among us; and, God has visited his people.
17 And this saying concerning him went forth into the whole of
Judea, and all the region round about.
18 And his disciples told John of all these things.
19 And having called some two of his disciples, John sent to the Lord,
saying: Art thou he that comes, or look we for another?
20 And coming to him the men said: John the Baptist has sent us to
thee, saying: Art thou he that comes, or look we for another?
21 In that hour he cured many of diseases and scourges and evil
spirits, and to many blind he gave to see.
22 And he answered and said to them: Go tell John what things you
have seen and heard, that the blind receive sight, the lame walk,
lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, the poor have
the gospel preached to them;
23 and blessed is he whoever is not offended at me.
24 But when the messengers of John had departed, he began to say
to the multitudes concerning John: What went you out into the
wilderness to see? a reed shaken by the wind?
25 But what went you out to see? a man clothed in soft raiment?
Behold, they that wear soft clothing and live in luxury are in kings’
houses.
26 But what went you out to see? a prophet? Yes, I say to you, and
more than a prophet.
27 This is he of whom it is written: Behold, I send my messenger
before thy face who shall prepare thy way before thee.
28 I say to you, among those born of women there is no prophet
greater than John; but the least in the kingdom of God is greater than
he.
29 And all the people that heard and the publicans justified God,
having been baptized with the baptism of John;
30 but the Pharisees and the lawyers rejected the counsel of God
against themselves, not having been baptized by him.
31 To what then shall I liken the men of this generation, and to what
are they like?The H. T. Anderson New Testament
121
32 They are like children that sit in the market and call one to
another, saying: We piped to you and you did not dance, we mourned
and you did not lament.
33 For John the Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine,
and you say: He has a demon.
34 The Son of man has come eating and drinking, and you say:
Behold, a man, a glutton and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and
sinners.
35 And yet wisdom is justified on the part of all her children.
36 And some one of the Pharisees asked him to eat with him; and he
went into the house of the Pharisee, and reclined at table.
37 And behold, a woman, who was in the city, a sinner, and had
learned that he reclined at table in the house of the Pharisee, brought
an alabaster box of ointment,
38 and stood behind at his feet weeping, and began to moisten his
feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head, and
kissed his feet, and anointed them with the ointment.
39 But the Pharisee that had invited him seeing it, spoke within
himself, saying: This man, if he were a prophet, would have known
who and what manner of woman this is that touches him, that she is
a sinner.
40 And Jesus answered and said to him: Simon, I have something to
say to thee. He replied: Teacher, say on.
41 A certain creditor had two debtors: the one owed him five hundred
denarii, the other, fifty.
42 As they had nothing to pay, he forgave them both. Which of them
then would love him the more?
43 Simon answered and said: I suppose that he to whom he forgave
the more. He said to him: Thou hast rightly judged.
44 And turning to the woman, he said to Simon: Seest thou this
woman? I entered thy house; water for my feet thou gavest not; but
she with her tears has moistened my feet, and with her hair has
wiped them.
45 A kiss thou gavest me not; but she from the time I came in has not
ceased to kiss my feet.
46 With oil my head thou didst not anoint; but she with ointment has
anointed my feet.
47 Wherefore, I say to thee, her sins which are many are forgiven,
because she loved much; but he to whom little is forgiven, loves little.
48 And he said to her: Thy sins are forgiven.
49 And they that reclined at table began to say within themselves:
Who is this that also forgives sins?
50 But he said to the woman: Thy faith has saved thee, go in peace.122
Codex Sinaiticus:
Luke 8
1 And it came to pass afterward that he went through every city and
village, preaching and telling the glad tidings of the kingdom of God;
and the twelve were with him,
2 and some women who had been cured of evil spirits and diseases;
Mary called Magdalene, out of whom had gone seven demons,
3 and Joanna wife of Chuza, Herod’s steward, and Susanna, and
many others, who ministered to him of their goods.
4 But as a great multitude had come together, and they were coming
to him from every city, he spoke by a parable:
5 The sower went forth to sow his seed. And as he sowed, some fell by
the way, and was trod down, and the birds of heaven ate it up;
6 and other fell upon the rock, and springing up it withered because
it had no moisture;
7 and other fell in the midst of thorns, and the thorns grew with it
and choked it;
8 and other fell on the good ground, and springing up it produced
fruit a hundredfold. Saying these things, he cried: He that has ears to
hear, let him hear.
9 And his disciples asked him what the parable might be.
10 And he said: To you is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom
of God; but to the rest in parables; that seeing they may not see, and
hearing they may not understand.
11 But the parable is this: The seed is the word of God.
12 And they by the way are they that hear; then comes the devil and
takes away the word from their heart, lest having believed they
should be saved.
13 And they on the rock are they who when they hear, receive the
word with joy; and these have no root, who believe for a time, and in
time of temptation apostatize.
14 But that which fell among thorns, are they that hear, and, going
forth, are choked by the cares and riches and pleasures of life, and
bring no fruit to perfection.
15 But that on the good ground, are they that in a good and honest
heart having heard the word keep it, and bring forth fruit in patience.
16 But no one after lighting a lamp covers it with a vessel or puts it
under a bed, but puts it on a lampstand, that they who come in may
see the light.
17 For there is nothing concealed that shall not become manifest,
neither hid which shall not be known and come into open view.
18 Take heed therefore how you hear; for whoever has, to him shall
be given; and whoever has not, even that which he seems to have
shall be taken from him.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
123
19 And his mother and his brothers were coming to him, and were
not able to approach him because of the multitude.
20 And it was told him: Thy mother and thy brothers stand without
desiring to see thee.
21 But he answered and said to them: My mother and my brothers
are they that hear the word of God and do it.
22 And it came to pass on one of the days that he himself entered a
ship, and his disciples; and he said to them: Let us go over to the
other side of the lake; and they put to sea.
23 But as they were sailing he fell asleep; and a squall of wind came
down on the lake, and they were filled and were in danger.
24 And coming forward, they waked him, saying: Master, Master, we
perish. But he awoke and rebuked the wind and the raging of the
water; and they ceased, and there was a calm.
25 And he said to them: Where is your faith? But being afraid they
were astonished, saying one to another: Who then is this, that he
commands both the winds and the water, and they obey him?
26 And they sailed down to the country of the Gergesenes, which is
opposite to Galilee.
27 And when he had come forth to land, there met him from the city
a man that had demons; and for a long time he wore no clothing, and
abode not in a house, but in the tombs.
28 But seeing Jesus, he cried out and fell before him, and with a loud
voice said: What have I to do with thee, Jesus, Son of God Most
High? I beseech thee, torment me not.
29 For he commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the man; for
at many times it had seized him, and he was bound with chains and
fetters, being imprisoned; and breaking the bonds he was driven by
the demon into the deserts.
30 And Jesus asked him, saying: What is thy name? And he said:
Legion, for many demons had entered into him.
31 And they besought him that he would not command them to go
away into the abyss.
32 But there was a herd of many swine feeding in the mountain; and
they besought him that he would permit them to enter into them.
And he permitted them.
33 And the demons having come out of the man entered into the
swine; and the herd rushed down the steep into the lake and were
choked.
34 But those who fed them, seeing what had been done, fled and told
it in the city and in the country.
35 And they came out to see what had been done, and came to Jesus,
and found the man, out of whom the demons had gone, sitting,124
Codex Sinaiticus:
clothed and in his right mind, at the feet of Jesus; and they were
afraid.
36 And those that saw told them how the possessed with demons had
been saved.
37 And all the multitude of the surrounding country of the
Gergesenes asked him to depart from them; for they were seized with
great fear; and he entered a ship and returned.
38 And the man out of whom the demons had gone besought him,
that he might be with him; but he sent him away, saying:
39 Return to thy house, and tell how great things God has done for
thee. And he departed, proclaiming throughout the whole city how
great things Jesus had done for him.
40 And it came to pass when Jesus had returned, the multitude
received him gladly; for all were looking for him.
41 And behold, there came a man whose name was Jairus, and he
was a ruler of the synagogue; and falling at the feet of Jesus, he
besought him to come into his house,
42 for he had a daughter, an only child, about twelve years old, and
she was dying. But as he was going, the multitudes thronged him.
43 And a woman, who had had an issue of blood for twelve years,
who had spent her whole living on physicians and could be cured by
none,
44 came behind and touched the fringe of his mantle; and
immediately the flow of her blood stopped.
45 And Jesus said: Who is it that touched me? And as all denied,
Peter and those with him said: Master, the multitudes press on thee
and crowd about thee.
46 But Jesus said: Some one touched me; for I perceived power going
forth from me.
47 And the woman, seeing that she had not escaped notice, came
trembling, and having fallen before him told before all the people for
what cause she had touched him, and how she had been immediately
restored to health.
48 But he said to her: Daughter, thy faith has saved thee; go in peace.
49 While he was yet speaking, there comes some one from the house
of the ruler of the synagogue, saying: Thy daughter is dead: trouble
the Teacher no more.
50 But Jesus hearing it answered him: Fear not; only believe, and she
shall be saved.
51 And when he had come to the house, he permitted no one to go in
with him but Peter and John and James, and the father and the
mother of the child.
52 And all wept, and lamented her. But he said: Weep not: she is not
dead, but sleeps.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
125
53 And they derided him, knowing that she was dead.
54 And taking her by the hand, he called, saying: Child, awake.
55 And her spirit returned, and she immediately arose; and he
commanded that food should be given to her.
56 And her parents were astonished; but he charged them to tell no
one what had been done.
Luke 9
1 And having called together the twelve, he gave them power and
authority over all the demons, and to cure diseases.
2 And he sent them to preach the kingdom of God, and to heal,
3 and said to them: Take nothing for the journey, neither staff, nor
bag, nor bread, nor silver, nor have two coats apiece.
4 And whatever house you enter, there abide, and thence depart.
5 And as many as may not receive you, when going out from that city
shake off even the dust from your feet for a testimony against them.
6 And they went out and passed through every village, preaching the
gospel and curing everywhere.
7 But Herod the tetrarch heard of all things that were done, and was
perplexed because it was said by some that John had risen from the
dead,
8 and by some that Elijah had appeared, and by others that a
prophet, some one of the ancients, had risen.
9 But Herod said: John I beheaded; but who is this of whom I hear
such things? And he sought to see him.
10 And the apostles returned and told him all things that they had
done. And he took them with him and withdrew privately to a city
called Bethsaida.
11 But the multitudes knew it and followed him; and he received
them and spoke to them of the kingdom of God, and healed those
that had need of healing.
12 But the day began to decline; and the twelve came and said to him:
Send the multitude away, that they may go into the villages and
country round about, and lodge and find food; for we are here in a
desert place.
13 But he said to them: Do you give them to eat. They replied: We
have not more than five loaves and two fishes, unless we should go
and buy food for all this people.
14 And they were about five thousand men. But he said to his
disciples: Make them recline in table-parties of fifty each.
15 And they did so, and made them all recline.126
Codex Sinaiticus:
16 And taking the five loaves and the two fishes, he looked up to
heaven, blessed them and broke, and gave to the disciples to set
before the multitude.
17 And all ate and were filled; and there was taken up what remained
to them of broken pieces, twelve traveling-baskets.
18 And it came to pass as he was praying alone, the disciples were
with him; and he asked them, saying: Who do the multitude say that
I am?
19 And they answered and said; John the Baptist; and others, Elijah;
and others, that a prophet, some one of the ancients, has risen.
20 But he said to them: But who say you that I am? And Peter
answered and said: The Christ of God.
21 And charging them strictly, he commanded them to tell this to no
one,
22 saying that the Son of man must suffer many things, and be
rejected by the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be put to
death, and rise the third day.
23 And he said to all: If any one will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me.
24 For whoever will save his life, shall lose it; but whoever may lose
his life for my sake, he shall save it.
25 For what is a man profited if he gain the whole world, but destroy
himself or be lost?
26 For whoever shall have been ashamed of me and my words, of
him shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he shall come in his
glory, and that of the Father, and of the holy angels.
27 But I tell you truly, there are some of these standing here that
shall not taste of death till they shall have seen the kingdom of God.
28 And it came to pass about eight days after these sayings, that he
took Peter and John and James, and went up into a mountain to
pray.
29 And it came to pass as he prayed that the appearance of his face
was changed, and his clothing was white and glittering.
30 And behold, two men conversed with him, who were Moses and
Elijah;
31 who appearing in glory spoke of his departure, which he was about
to accomplish in Jerusalem.
32 But Peter and those with him were heavy with sleep; but keeping
awake they saw his glory and the two men that stood with him.
33 And it came to pass as they were separated from him Peter said to
Jesus: Master, it is good that we are here, and let us make three
tents, one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah, not
knowing what he said.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
127
34 And as he spoke these things there came a cloud and
overshadowed them; and they were afraid as they entered the cloud.
35 And a voice came from the cloud, saying: This is my Son, the elect;
hear him.
36 And when the voice had passed, Jesus was found alone. And they
kept silence, and told no one, in those days, any of the things that
they had seen.
37 And it came to pass on the next day, when they had come down
from the mountain, a great multitude met him.
38 And behold, a man from the multitude cried, saying: Teacher, I
beseech thee, look upon my son, for he is my only born;
39 and lo, a spirit seizes him, and suddenly cries out, and convulses
him so that he foams, and after bruising him hardly departs from
him.
40 And I requested thy disciples that they would cast him out; and
they were not able.
41 And Jesus answered and said: O generation faithless and perverse,
how long shall I be with you, and bear with you? Bring thy son hither.
42 But while he was yet coming, the demon threw him down and
convulsed him; and Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and restored
the child to health, and gave him again to his father.
43 And all were amazed at the majesty of God. But while all were
wondering at all things that he did, he said to his disciples:
44 Put you into your ears these words; for the Son of man is about to
be delivered into the hands of men.
45 But they comprehended not this saying, and it was concealed from
them that they could not perceive it; and they were afraid to ask him
concerning this saying.
46 And there arose a reasoning among them as to which of them was
greatest.
47 But Jesus, knowing the reasoning of their heart, took a little child
and set it by him,
48 and said to them: Whoever shall receive this child in my name
receives me; and whoever shall receive me, receives him that sent
me; for he that is least among you all, he is great.
49 And John answered and said: Master, we saw one casting out
demons in thy name, and we forbade him, because he follows not
with us.
50 And Jesus said to him: Forbid not, for he that is not against us is
for us.
51 But it came to pass as the days of his being received up were
completing, he steadfastly fixed his face to go to Jerusalem,
52 and sent messengers before his face. And they went and entered a
city of the Samaritans, so as to make ready for him;128
Codex Sinaiticus:
53 and they received him not, because his face was going to
Jerusalem.
54 And the disciples James and John, seeing it, said: Lord, wilt thou
that we command fire to come down from heaven, and consume
them?
55 But he turned and rebuked them.
56 And they went to another village.
57 And as they were going on the way, some one said to him: I will
follow thee wherever thou goest.
58 And Jesus said to him: The foxes have dens, and the birds of the
heavens have roosts, but the Son of man has not where he may lay
his head.
59 And he said to another: Follow me. He replied: Permit me first to
go and bury my father.
60 But he said to him: Let the dead bury their own dead: but go thou
and proclaim the kingdom of God.
61 And another also said: I will follow thee, Lord; but first permit me
to take leave of those at my house.
62 And Jesus said to him: No one that puts his hand to the plow and
looks back is fit for the kingdom of God.
Luke 10
1 But after these things the Lord appointed seventy others also, and
sent them two and two before his face into every city and place
whither he himself was about to come.
2 And he said to them: The harvest indeed is great, but the laborers
are few: pray therefore the Lord of the harvest that he send laborers
into his harvest.
3 Go; behold, I send you forth as lambs in the midst of wolves.
4 Carry no purse, no bag, no sandals: salute no one by the way.
5 Whatever house you enter, first say: Peace to this house.
6 And if a son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it; but if
not, it shall return upon you.
7 And abide in the same house, eating and drinking such things as
they have; for the laborer is worthy of his hire. Go not from house to
house.
8 And whatever city you enter and they receive you, eat what is set
before you,
9 and cure those in it that are sick, and say to them: The kingdom of
God has come near to you,
10 But whatever city you enter, and they receive you not, go out into
the streets of it and say:The H. T. Anderson New Testament
129
11 Even the dust of your city that cleaves to us on our feet we wipe off
against you: yet know this that the kingdom of God is near.
12 And I say to you that it shall be more tolerable for Sodom in that
day than for that city.
13 Alas for thee, Chorazin; alas for thee, Bethsaida; for if the mighty
works which have been done in you had been done in Tyre and
Sidon, they would have repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and
ashes.
14 Furthermore, it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the
judgment, than for you.
15 And thou, Capernaum, shalt thou be exalted to heaven? Thou shalt
be brought down to hades.
16 He that hears you hears me; and he that rejects you rejects me;
and he that rejects me rejects him that sent me.
17 And the seventy returned with joy, saying: Lord, even the demons
are subjected to us in thy name.
18 And he said to them: I beheld Satan like lightning from heaven
fallen.
19 Behold, I have given you authority to tread on serpents and
scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy, and nothing shall in
any way hurt you.
20 Yet in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subjected to you; but
rejoice that your names are written in the heavens.
21 In that hour he rejoiced in the Holy Spirit and said: I give thee
thanks, Father, Lord of heaven and of earth, because thou hast
concealed these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed
them to babes; yes, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight.
22 And turning to the disciples, he said: All things have been
delivered to me by my Father, and no one knows who the Son is but
the Father, and who the Father is but the Son, and he to whomever
the Son will reveal him.
23 And turning to the disciples he said privately: Blessed are the eyes
that see what you see.
24 For I say to you that many prophets and kings desired to see what
you see, and did not see, and to hear what you hear, and did not hear.
25 And behold, a lawyer stood up tempting him, saying: Teacher,
what shall I do to inherit eternal life?
26 And he said to him: What is written in the law? How readest
thou?
27 And he answered and said: Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with
thy whole heart, and with thy whole soul, and with thy whole
strength, and with thy whole mind, and thy neighbor as thyself.
28 And he said to him: Thou hast rightly answered: do this, and thou
shalt live.130
Codex Sinaiticus:
29 But he, willing to justify himself, said to Jesus: And who is my
neighbor?
30 Jesus replying said: A man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho,
and fell among robbers, who stripped him and wounded him, and
went away, leaving him half dead.
31 And by chance a priest went down on that road, and seeing him,
passed by on the other side.
32 And in like manner also a Levite, having come to the place, went
and looked on and passed by on the other side.
33 But a Samaritan on a journey came opposite to him, and seeing
him, was moved with pity;
34 and going to him, he bound up his wounds, pouring on oil and
wine; and setting him on his own beast, took him to an inn and took
care of him.
35 And on the morrow, taking out two denarii, he gave them to the
innkeeper and said: Take care of him, and whatever thou spendest
more. I on my return will repay thee.
36 Which of these three, thinkest thou, was neighbor to him that fell
among the robbers?
37 He replied: He that showed mercy to him. And Jesus said to him:
Go, and do thou in like manner.
38 And it came to pass as they journeyed that he went into a certain
village; and a certain woman named Martha received him into her
house.
39 And she had a sister called Mary, who also sat at the feet of the
Lord and heard his word.
40 But Martha was perplexed about much service; and she stood by
him and said: Lord, carest thou not that my sister has left me to serve
alone? Bid her therefore that she help me.
41 But the Lord answered and said to her: Martha, Martha, thou art
anxious and troubled about many things;
42 of one however there is need; for Mary has chosen the good part,
which shall not be taken away from her.
Luke 11
1 And it came to pass as he was in a certain place praying, when he
had ceased, some one of his disciples said to him: Lord, teach us to
pray, as John also taught his disciples.
2 And he said to them: Whenever you pray, say: Father, thy name be
hallowed: thy kingdom come:
3 give us day by day our needful bread;
4 and forgive us our sins, for we also forgive every one indebted to
us; and lead us not into temptation.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
131
5 And he said to them: Which of you shall have a friend, and shall go
to him at midnight and say to him: Friend, lend me three loaves,
6 because a friend of mine has come from a journey to me, and I have
not what I may set before him.
7 And he from within shall answer and say: Trouble me not; the door
is now closed, and my children with me are in bed: I cannot rise to
give thee.
8 I say to you, though he will not give him, having risen because he is
his friend, yet because of his importunity he will rise and give him as
many as he needs.
9 And I say to you: Ask, and it shall be given to you; seek, and you
shall find; knock, and it shall be opened to you.
10 For every one that asks receives, and he that seeks finds, and to
him that knocks it shall be opened.
11 But should a son ask bread of any one of you that is a father, would
he give him a stone? or also a fish, would he for a fish give him a
serpent?
12 or should he also ask an egg, would he give him a scorpion?
13 If therefore you being evil know how to give good gifts to your
children, how much more will the Father who is from heaven give the
Holy Spirit to those that ask him.
14 And he was casting out a demon, and it was dumb; but it came to
pass when the demon had gone out the dumb man spoke. And the
multitudes wondered;
15 but some of them said: By Beelzebub, the prince of the demons, he
casts out the demons.
16 And others tempting sought of him a sign from heaven.
17 But he knowing their thoughts said to them: Every kingdom
divided against itself is made desolate, and house falls against house.
18 And if Satan also has been divided against himself, how shall his
kingdom stand? for you say, that I cast out the demons by Beelzebub.
19 But if I cast out the demons by Beelzebub, by whom do your sons
cast them out? Therefore they shall be your judges.
20 But if I by the finger of God cast out the demons, then has the
kingdom of God already come upon you.
21 When the strong man armed keeps guard over his palace, his
goods are in peace.
22 But when a stronger than he comes upon him and overcomes him,
he takes away all his armor in which he has trusted, and distributes
his spoils.
23 He that is not with me is against me, and he that gathers not with
me
scatters*.
* lit. “scatters me” in Sinaiticus, according to Ehrman.132
Codex Sinaiticus:
24 When the unclean spirit has gone out of the man, he goes through
dry places seeking rest, and finding none, he says: I will return to my
house whence I came.
25 And he comes and finds it swept and set in order.
26 Then he goes and takes with him seven other spirits more wicked
than himself; and entering in, they dwell there; and the last state of
that man becomes worse than the first.
27 And it came to pass as he said these things, a woman from the
multitude lifted up her voice and said to him: Blessed is the womb
that bore thee, and the breasts that thou didst suck.
28 But he said: Yes rather, blessed are they that hear the word of God
and keep it.
29 And while the multitudes crowded together, he began to say: This
generation is an evil generation: it seeks a sign, and no sign shall be
given to it but the sign of Jonah.
30 For as Jonah was a sign to the Ninevites, so shall the Son of man
also be to this generation.
31 The queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with the men
of this generation and condemn them; for she came from the ends of
the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and behold, something
greater than Solomon is here.
32 The men of Nineveh shall stand up in the judgment with this
generation and condemn it; for they repented at the preaching of
Jonah, and behold, something greater than Jonah is here.
33 No one after lighting a lamp puts it in a secret place, nor under the
measure, but upon the lamp-stand, that those who come in may see
the light.
34 The lamp of the body is thy eye. When thy eye is simple, thy whole
body also is full of light; but whenever it is evil, thy body also is full of
darkness.
35 Take heed therefore lest the light that is in thee is darkness.
36 If thus thy whole body is full of light, having no part dark, the
whole shall be full of light, as when the lamp by its brightness gives
thee light.
37 But while he spoke, a Pharisee asked him to dine with him; and he
went in and reclined at table.
38 And the Pharisee seeing it wondered that he had not first
immersed himself before dinner.
39 But the Lord said to him: Now, you Pharisees make clean the
outside of the cup and the dish, but your inward part is full of
extortion and wickedness.
40 Senseless men; did not he that made the outside make the inside
also?The H. T. Anderson New Testament
133
41 But give the contents as charity, and behold, all things are clean to
you.
42 But alas for you Pharisees, for you pay tithes of mint and rue and
every herb, and pass by the judgment and the love of God: these
ought you to have done and not leave those undone.
43 Alas for you Pharisees, for you love the chief seat in the
synagogues and salutations in the markets.
44 Alas for you, for you are as graves that appear not, and the men
that walk over them know it not.
45 And some one of the lawyers answering said to him: Teacher,
saying these things, thou reproachest us also.
46 He replied: Alas for you lawyers also, for you burden men with
burdens hard to be borne, and yourselves touch not the burdens with
one of your fingers.
47 Alas for you, for you build the sepulchers of the prophets, and
your fathers killed them.
48 Therefore you are witnesses and you consent to the deeds of your
fathers, for they indeed killed them, but you build.
49 Wherefore also the wisdom of God said: I will send to them
prophets and apostles, and of them they will kill and persecute,
50 that the blood of all the prophets, which has been shed from the
foundation of the world, may be required of this generation;
51 from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zachariah, who perished
between the altar and the house: yes, I say to you, it shall be required
of this generation.
52 Alas for you lawyers, for you have taken away the key of
knowledge: you went not in yourselves, and those that were entering
you hindered.
53 And when he had gone out thence the scribes and the Pharisees
began to be very angry, and to press him to speak of many things,
54 lying in wait to catch something I from his mouth.
Luke 12
1 In the meantime, when myriads of the multitude had come
together, so that they trod one upon another, he began to say to his
disciples first: Beware you of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is
hypocrisy.
2 But nothing is concealed which shall not be revealed, and hid which
shall not be made known.
3 Wherefore, whatever things you have said in darkness, shall be
heard in the light, and what you have spoken in the ear in closets,
shall be proclaimed on the housetops.
4 But I say to you, my friends, be not afraid of them that kill the
body, and after this have no more that they can do.134
Codex Sinaiticus:
5 But I will show you whom you shall fear: Fear him who after he has
killed has authority to cast into hell. Yes, I say to you, fear him.
6 Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings? And yet not one of
them is forgotten before God.
7 But even the hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not: you are
of more value than many sparrows.
8 But I say to you: Whoever confesses me before men, him also shall
the Son of man confess before the angels of God;
9 but he that denies me before men shall be denied before the angels
of God.
10 And every one that shall speak a word against the Son of man, it
shall be forgiven him; but to him that blasphemes against the Holy
Spirit it shall not be forgiven.
11 But when they bring you before synagogues, and rulers, and
authorities, be not anxious how or what you shall answer in defense
or what you shall say;
12 for the Holy Spirit shall teach you in the same hour what things
you ought to say.
13 But someone from the multitude said to him: Teacher, speak to
my brother that he divide with me the inheritance.
14 But he said to him: Man, who appointed me a judge or a divider
over you?
15 And he said to them: Take heed and beware of all covetousness,
for no one has his life in the abundance of the things which he
possesses.
16 And he spoke a parable to them, saying: The ground of a certain
rich man brought forth abundantly.
17 And he reasoned within himself, saying: What shall I do, for I have
not where I shall gather in my fruits?
18 And he said: This will I do; I will pull down my barns and build
greater, and there will I gather in all my produce and my good things;
19 and I will say to my soul: Soul, thou hast many good things laid up
for many years: rest, eat, drink, be merry.
20 But God said to him: Senseless man, this night shall they require
thy soul of thee: but the things that thou hast prepared, whose shall
they be?
21 So is he that lays up treasure for himself and is not rich toward
God.
22 And he said to his disciples: Therefore, I say to you, be not
anxious for your life what you shall eat, neither for your body what
you shall put on.
23 Is not the life more than the food, and the body than the clothing?The H. T. Anderson New Testament
135
24 Consider the ravens, that they neither sow nor reap, which have
neither storehouse nor granary, and yet God feeds them: how much
better you are than the birds.
25 But which of you by being anxious can add to his age one cubit?
26 If then you can do not even the least, why are you anxious about
the rest?
27 Consider the lilies, how they neither spin nor weave; yet I say to
you, not even Solomon in all his glory was clothed like one of these.
28 And if God so clothes the grass that to-day is in the field, and
tomorrow is thrown into the oven, how much more will he clothe
you, O you of little faith.
29 And you, seek not what you shall eat and what you shall drink,
and be not of doubtful mind;
30 for all these things the nations of the world seek after; but your
Father knows that you need these.
31 But seek his kingdom, and these things shall be given you in
addition.
32 Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father’s good pleasure to give
you the kingdom.
33 Sell your possessions and give charity: make for yourselves purses
that grow not old, a treasury unfailing in the heavens, where no thief
comes near, neither moth corrupts.
34 For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
35 Let your loins be girded and your lamps burning;
36 and be you like men awaiting their lord, when he shall return
from the marriage, that when he comes and knocks they may
immediately open to him.
37 Blessed are those servants, whom the lord when he comes shall
find watching: verily I say to you that he will gird himself and make
them recline at table, and coming forth he will serve them.
38 And if in the second, and if in the third watch, he shall come and
find them so, blessed are they.
39 But know this, that if the master of the house had known at what
hour the thief would come, he would not have permitted his house to
be broken through.
40 And you, be ready, for at an hour at which you think not the Son
of man comes.
41 But Peter said to him: Lord, to us dost thou speak this parable or
also to all?
42 And the Lord said: Who then is the faithful steward, the prudent,
whom the lord shall appoint over his company of servants to give the
measure of food in season?
43 Blessed is that servant, whom his lord on coming shall find so
doing.136
Codex Sinaiticus:
44 Truly I say to you that he will set him over all his goods.
45 But if that servant shall say in his heart: My lord delays to come,
and shall begin to smite the menservants and the maidservants, to
eat also and to drink and to be drunken:
46 the lord of that servant will come in a day that he looks not for,
and at an hour that he knows not, and will cut him asunder, and
appoint his portion with the unfaithful.
47 But that servant that knew his lord’s will, and did not prepare or
do according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes;
48 but he that knew not, and did things worthy of stripes, shall be
beaten with few. And every one to whom much has been given, of
him much shall be required, and to whom much has been committed,
of him will they ask the more.
49 A fire came I to throw upon the earth, and what would I if it were
already kindled?
50 A baptism have I to be baptized with, and how am I in pain till it
be accomplished.
51 Think you that I came to give peace on earth? I tell you no, but
rather division.
52 For there shall be, from this time, five in one house divided; three
against two and two against three
53 shall they be divided, father against son and son against father;
mother against daughter and daughter against mother; mother-in-
law against daughter-in-law, and daughter-in-law against mother-in-
law.
54 And he said also to the multitudes: When you see a cloud rising in
the west, immediately you say that a shower is coming, and so it
comes to pass;
55 and when you see the south wind blowing, you say that there will
be heat, and it comes to pass.
56 Hypocrites, you know how to judge of the face of the earth and of
the heaven, but how do you not judge of this time?
57 And why also do you not of yourselves judge that which is right?
58 For as thou goest with thy opponent-at-law to the ruler, on the
way endeavor to be delivered from him, lest perhaps he drag thee to
the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the collector, and the
collector throw thee into prison.
59 I tell thee, thou shalt not come out thence till thou shalt have paid
even the last farthing.
Luke 13
l And there were present at that time some that told him of the
Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
137
2 And he answered and said to them: Think you that these Galileans
had become sinners above all the Galileans because they suffered
such things?
3 I tell you no; but unless you repent, you shall all in like manner
perish.
4 Or those eighteen, on whom fell the tower in Siloam and killed
them, think you that they had become debtors above all the men that
dwell in Jerusalem?
5 I tell you no; but unless you repent, you shall all in like manner
perish.
6 And he spoke this parable: A certain man had a fig-tree planted in
his vineyard, and he came seeking fruit on it, and found none.
7 And he said to the vinedresser: Behold, for three years I come
seeking fruit on this fig-tree and find none: cut it down; why also
spoils it the ground?
8 But he answered and said to him: Sir, let it alone this year also, till I
shall dig about it and throw in manure;
9 and if afterward it produce fruit; but if not, thou shalt cut it down.
10 And he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the Sabbath.
11 And behold, a woman that had had a spirit of infirmity eighteen
years; and she was bowed together and was not able to lift herself up
at all.
12 And seeing her, Jesus called to her and said to her: Woman, thou
art loosed from thy infirmity;
13 and he laid his hands on her; and she immediately stood erect,
and glorified God.
14 But the ruler of the synagogue answered, being angry because
Jesus had cured on the sabbath, and said to the multitude: There are
six days in which work ought to be done: on them therefore come
and be cured, and not on the sabbath day.
15 But the Lord answered him and said: Hypocrites, does not each
one of you on the sabbath loose his ox or his ass from the stall and
lead him away and give him water?
16 But this woman, who is a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan has
bound lo, eighteen years, ought she not to be loosed from this bond
on the sabbath day?
17 And when he had said these things, all his adversaries were
ashamed, and all the multitude rejoiced for all the glorious things
that had been done by him.
18 He said therefore: To what is the kingdom of God like, and to what
shall I liken it?
19 It is like a grain of mustard that a man took and threw into his
garden; and it grew and became a tree, and the birds of the heaven
roosted in its branches.138
Codex Sinaiticus:
20 And again he said: To what shall I liken the kingdom of God?
21 It is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of
flour, till the whole was leavened.
22 And he passed through the cities and villages teaching and
making the journey to Jerusalem.
23 And some one said to him: Lord, are they few that are saved? But
he said to them:
24 Strive to enter in through the strait gate; for many, I say to you,
will seek to enter in and shall not be able.
25 From whatever time the master of the house shall have risen up
and closed the door and you shall have begun to stand without and to
knock at the door, saying: Lord, open to us, and he shall answer and
say to you: I know you not whence you are:
26 then shall you begin to say: We have eaten and drunk in thy
presence, and in our streets hast thou taught.
27 And he will say: I tell you, I know you not whence you are: depart
from me, all workers of iniquity.
28 There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when you shall see
Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets in the kingdom of
God, but yourselves cast out.
29 And they shall come from east and west and north and south, and
shall recline at table in the kingdom of God.
30 And behold, there are last that shall be first, and there are first
that shall be last.
31 At that hour came to him some Pharisees, saying to him: Get out
and depart hence, for Herod will kill thee.
32 And he said to them: Go and tell this fox: Behold, I cast out
demons and perfect cures today and tomorrow, and on the third day
I make an end.
33 But I must journey today and to-morrow and the day following;
for it is not possible that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem.
34 Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the prophets and stonest them
that are sent to thee, how often have I desired to gather thy children
together as a hen her young under her wings, and you refused.
35 Behold, your house is left to you. I say to you that you shall not see
me till the time come when you shall say: Blessed is he that comes in
the name of the Lord.
Luke 14
1 And it came to pass that he entered on a sabbath into the house of
some one of the chief men of the Pharisees to eat bread, and they
were watching him.
2 And behold, there was before him a man that had the dropsy.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
139
3 And Jesus answered and spoke to the lawyers and Pharisees,
saying: Is it lawful to cure on the sabbath, or not? But they were
silent.
4 And he took him and restored him to health and let him go.
5 And answering, he said to them: Shall a son or ox of any one of you
fall into a pit and will he not immediately draw him out on the
sabbath day?
6 And they were not able to answer him to these things.
7 But when he observed how they chose out the chief places, he spoke
a parable to those that were called saying to them:
8 When thou art called by any one to a marriage, do not recline on
the chief place, lest a more honorable than thou may have been called
by him,
9 and he that called thee and him shall come and say to thee: Give
this man place, and then thou begin with shame to occupy the last
place.
10 But when thou art called, go and recline on the last place; that
when he that called thee come, he shall say to thee: Friend, go up
higher: then shalt thou have honor in the presence of those that
recline with thee.
11 For every one that exalts himself shall be humbled, and he that
humbles himself shall be exalted.
12 And he said also to him that had called him: When thou wouldst
make a dinner or a supper, call not thy friends, nor thy brothers, nor
thy relatives, nor rich neighbors, lest they also call thee in turn, and a
recompense be made thee.
13 But when thou wouldst make a feast, call the poor, the maimed,
the lame, the blind,
14 and thou shalt be blessed: for they cannot recompense thee; but
thou shalt have recompense in the resurrection of the just.
15 And some one of those that reclined with him, hearing these
things, said to him: Blessed is he that eats bread in the kingdom of
God.
16 But he said to him: A certain man made a great supper and called
many;
17 and sent his servant at the hour of supper to say to those that had
been called: Come, for it is now prepared.
18 And they all with one consent began to make excuse. The first said
to him: I have bought a field, and I must 1 needs go and see it: I pray
thee, have me excused.
19 And another said: I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I am going
to prove them: I pray thee, have me excused.
20 And another said: I have married a wife and therefore I cannot
come.140
Codex Sinaiticus:
21 And the servant came back and reported these things to his lord.
Then the master of the house, being angry, said to his servant: Go out
quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and the poor and
maimed and blind and lame bring in hither.
22 And the servant said: Lord, what thou didst command has been
done, and yet there is room.
23 And the lord said to the servant: Go out into the roads and
hedges; and compel them to come in, that my house may be full;
24 for I say: to you that not one of those men that have been called
shall taste of my supper.
25 And many multitudes journeyed with him; and he turned and said
to them:
26 If any one comes to me and hates not his father and mother, and
wife and children, and brothers and sisters, and even his own life
also, he cannot be my disciple.
27 Whoever does not bear his cross and come after me cannot be my
disciple.
28 For what one of you intending to build a tower sits not down first
and counts the cost, if he has enough to finish it?
29 lest perhaps, after he has laid the foundation and is not able to
finish, all that see begin to deride him,
30 saying: This man began to build and was not able to finish.
31 Or what king going to engage in battle with another king, will not
sit down first and deliberate whether he is able with ten thousand to
meet him that comes against him with twenty thousand?
32 But if not, while he is yet far off, he sends an embassy and asks
conditions of peace.
33 So then, no one of you that forsakes not all that he has can be my
disciple.
34 Salt then is good; but if the salt become tasteless, by what means
shall it be seasoned?
35 It is fit neither for earth nor for manure: they cast it out. He that
has ears, let him hear.
Luke 15
1 And all the publicans and the sinners were drawing near to him to
hear him.
2 And both the Pharisees and the scribes murmured, saying: This
man receives sinners and eats with them.
3 But he spoke to them this parable, saying:
4 What man of you, that has a hundred sheep, and loses one of them,
does not leave the ninety-nine in the wilderness, and go after that
which is lost, till he find it?The H. T. Anderson New Testament
141
5 And when he finds it, he lays it on his shoulder rejoicing;
6 and having come home, he calls together the friends and the
neighbors, saying to them: Rejoice with me, for I have found my
sheep that was lost.
7 I say to you that so there shall be joy in heaven over one sinner that
repents, more than over ninety-nine righteous who have no need of
repentance.
8 Or what woman having ten drachmas, if she lose one drachma,
does not light a lamp and sweep the house and seek carefully till she
find it?
9 And when she has found it, she calls together the friends and
neighbors, saying: Rejoice with me, for I have found the drachma
that I lost.
10 So, I say to you, there arises joy in the presence of the angels of
God over one sinner that repents.
11 And he said: A certain man had two sons.
12 And the younger of them said to the father: Father, give me the
part of the estate that falls to me. And he divided to them the living.
13 And not many days after, the younger son gathered all together
and went from home into a distant country, and there wasted his
estate by riotous living.
14 But when he had spent all, there arose a great famine throughout
that land, and he began to be in want.
15 And he went and joined himself to one of the citizens of that
country, and he sent him into his fields to feed swine;
16 and he desired to fill his belly with the pods that the swine did eat;
and no one gave to him.
17 But having come to himself, he said: How many hired servants of
my father have bread enough and to spare; but I am perishing here
with hunger.
18 I will arise and go to my father and say to him: Father, I have
sinned against heaven and in thy sight;
19 no longer am I worthy to be called thy son: make me as one of thy
hired servants.
20 And he arose and came to his father. And while he was yet a great
way off, his father saw him and had pity on him; and running, he fell
upon his neck and kissed him.
21 And the son said to him: Father, I have sinned against heaven and
in thy sight; no longer am I worthy to be called thy son.
22 But the father said to his servants: Bring forth the best robe and
put it on him, and put a ring on his hand, and sandals on his feet;
23 and bring the fatted calf, kill, and let us eat and be merry;
24 for this, my son, was dead and lives again, was lost and is found.
And they began to be merry.142
Codex Sinaiticus:
25 But his older son was in the field; and when he came and drew
near to the house, he heard music and dancing;
26 and calling to him one of the servants, he inquired what these
things meant.
27 And he said to him: Thy brother has come, and thy father has
killed the fatted calf, because he has received him in health.
28 But he was angry, and would not go in; and his father came out
and entreated him.
29 But he answered and said to the father: Behold, so many years do
I serve thee, and at no time have I transgressed thy commandment;
and yet to me thou hast at no time given a kid that I might make
merry with my friends;
30 but when thy son, this that has eaten up thy living with harlots,
came, thou didst kill for him the fatted calf.
31 But he said to him: Son, thou art always with me, and all mine is
thine;
32 but to make merry and to be glad was needful, for this thy brother
was dead and lives again; was lost and is found.
Luke 16
1 And he said also to the disciples: There was a certain rich man who
had a steward, and he was accused to him of wasting his goods.
2 And he called him and said to him: What is this that I hear of thee?
Give an account of thy stewardship; for thou canst no longer act as
steward.
3 And the steward said within himself: What shall I do? for my lord
takes from me the stewardship. To dig I am not able, to beg I am
ashamed.
4 I have found what I shall do, that when I am put out of the
stewardship they may receive me into their houses.
5 And calling to him each one of his lord’s debtors, he said to the
first: How much owest thou my lord?
6 He said: A hundred baths of oil. And he said to him: Take back thy
note, and sit down quickly and write fifty.
7 Then he said to another: And how much owest thou? And he said:
A hundred homers of wheat. He says to him: Take back thy note, and
write eighty.
8 And the lord commended the unjust steward, because he had acted
prudently; for the children of this age are, in reference to their
generation, wiser than the children of light.
9 And I say to you: Make to yourselves friends of the mammon of
unrighteousness, that when it fails they may receive you into the
eternal habitations.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
143
10 He that is faithful in very little is faithful also in much, and he that
is unjust in very little is unjust also in much.
11 If then you have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon,
who will entrust to you the true riches?
12 And if you have not been faithful in that which is another’s, who
will give to you that which is your own?
13 No servant can serve two masters; for either he will hate the one
and love the other; or he will hold the one and despise the other. You
cannot serve God and mammon.
14 And the Pharisees, who were lovers of money, heard all these
things, and scoffed at him.
15 And he said to them: You are they that justify yourselves before
men, but God knows your hearts; for that which is highly esteemed
among men is an abomination in the sight of God.
16 The law and the prophets preached till John; from that time the
kingdom of God is preached, and every one enters it by force.
17 But it is easier for heaven and earth to pass away, than for one
point of the law to fall.
18 Every one that puts away his wife and marries another commits
adultery, and he that marries her that is put away from a husband
commits adultery.
19 But there was a certain rich man, and he was clothed in purple
and fine linen, feasting splendidly every day.
20 And a certain poor man named Lazarus had been laid at his gate,
full of sores,
21 and desiring to be fed with that which fell from the rich man’s
table: moreover, even the dogs came and licked his sores.
22 But it came to pass that the poor man died and was carried by
angels to Abraham’s bosom; and the rich man also died and was
buried.
23 And in hades he lifted up his eyes, being in torments, and saw
Abraham afar off and Lazarus in his bosom.
24 And he cried and said: Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and
send Lazarus that he may dip the tip of his finger in water and cool
my tongue, for I am tormented in this flame.
25 But Abraham said: Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime
receivedst thy good things, and Lazarus likewise evil things; but now
here he is comforted and thou art tormented.
26 And in all these regions between us and you a great chasm is
fixed, so that they that would pass hence to you cannot, neither can
they pass thence to us.
27 And he said: I pray thee then, father, that thou wouldst send him
to my father’s house;144
Codex Sinaiticus:
28 for I have five brothers: that he may earnestly testify to them, lest
they themselves also come to this place of torment.
29 But Abraham said to him: They have Moses and the prophets: let
them hear them.
30 And he said: No, father Abraham; but if one from the dead should
go to them, they will repent.
31 But he said to him: If they hear not Moses and the prophets,
neither will they be persuaded though one should rise from the dead.
Luke 17
1 And he said to his disciples: It is impossible that offenses come not;
but alas for him through whom they come:
2 it were better for him that an upper millstone were hung about his
neck and he thrown into the sea, than that he should offend one of
these little ones.
3 Take heed to yourselves. If thy brother sin, rebuke him; and if he
repent, forgive him.
4 And if he sin against thee seven times in a day, and seven times
turn to thee, saying: I repent, thou shalt forgive him.
5 And the apostles said to the Lord: Increase our faith.
6 But the Lord said: If you have faith as a grain of mustard, you
might say to this sycamine tree: Be uprooted and be planted in the
sea, and it would obey you.
7 But which of you in having a servant plowing or feeding a flock, will
say to him when he comes from the field: Come immediately and
recline at table?
8 But will he not say to him: Make ready my supper, and gird thyself
and serve me till I eat and drink, and after this thou shalt eat and
drink?
9 Does he thank the servant because he did the things that were
commanded?
10 So also you, when you shall have done all things that are
commanded you, say that we are unprofitable servants; we have done
what we ought to have done.
11 And it came to pass as he journeyed to Jerusalem, he also went
through the midst of Samaria and Galilee.
12 And as he entered a certain village there met him ten leprous men,
who stood afar off;
13 and they lifted up their voices, saying: Jesus, Master, have mercy
on us.
14 And seeing, he said to them: Go, show yourselves to the priests.
And it came to pass as they went they were cleansed.
15 And one of them, seeing that he was healed, returned, with a loud
voice glorifying God;The H. T. Anderson New Testament
145
16 and fell on his face at his feet, giving him thanks; and he was a
Samaritan.
17 But Jesus answered and said: Were not the ten cleansed? Where
are the nine?
18 Were there not found returning to give glory to God but this one of
another race?
19 And he said to him: Arise and go: thy faith has saved thee.
20 And having been asked by the Pharisees when the kingdom of
God would come, he answered them and said: The kingdom of God
comes not with observation;
21 neither shall they say: Lo, here or there; for behold, the kingdom
of God is among you.
22 But he said to his disciples: Days will come when you shall desire
to see one of the days of the Son of man, and shall not see it.
23 And they shall say to you: Lo here, lo there: go not after them nor
follow them.
24 For as the lightning flashing out from one place under heaven
shines to the other place under heaven, so shall the Son of man be in
his day.
25 But first must he suffer many things, and be rejected by this
generation.
26 And as it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be also in the days of
the Son of man.
27 They were eating, they were drinking, they were marrying, they
were giving in marriage till the day on which Noah entered the ark,
and the flood came and destroyed all.
28 Likewise as it was in the days of Lot: they were eating, they were
drinking, they were buying, they were selling, they were planting,
they were building;
29 but on the day in which Lot went out of Sodom, there rained fire
and brimstone from heaven and destroyed all.
30 So shall it be in the day in which the Son of man is revealed.
31 In that day he that shall be on the housetop, and his goods in the
house, let him not come down to take them away; and he that is in
the field let him likewise not turn back.
32 Remember Lot’s wife.
33 Whoever shall seek to gain his life shall lose it: and whoever shall
lose it shall save it alive.
34 I say to you, on that night there shall be two men in one bed: one
shall be taken and the other left:
35 there shall be two women grinding together: the one shall be
taken, but the other left.146
Codex Sinaiticus:
37 And they answer and say to him: Where, Lord? And he said to
them: Where the body is, there also will the eagles be gathered
together.
Luke 18
1 And he spoke a parable to them to this end, that they ought always
to pray and not grow weary,
2 saying: There was in a city a judge that feared not God, and
regarded not man.
3 And there was a widow in that city, and she came to him, saying:
Avenge me, on my opponent-at-law.
4 And he would not for a time; but afterward he said within himself:
Though I fear not God, neither regard man,
5 yet, because this widow gives me trouble, I will avenge her, lest
coming continually she weary me.
6 And the Lord said: Hear what the unjust judge says;
7 and will not God avenge his elect who cry to him day and night, and
does he bear long towards them?
8 I say to you that he will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless will the
Son of man, when he comes, find the faith on the earth?
9 And he spoke also this parable to some that trusted in themselves
that they were righteous, and despised others:
10 Two men went up into the temple to pray, the one a Pharisee and
the other a publican.
11 The Pharisee stood and prayed thus: God, I thank thee that I am
not as the rest of men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this
publican.
12 I fast twice in the week, I pay tithes of all that I possess.
13 But the publican, standing far off, would not lift even his eyes to
heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying: God, be merciful to me
the sinner.
14 I say to you, this man went down to his house justified rather
indeed than the other; for every one that exalts himself shall be
humbled, but he that humbles himself shall be exalted.
15 And they brought to him also their infants that he might touch
them; but the disciples, seeing, rebuked them.
16 But Jesus called them to him, saying: Let the little children come
to me and forbid them not; for to such belongs the kingdom of God.
17 Verily I say to you, whoever shall not receive the kingdom of God
as a little child, shall not enter into it.
18 And a ruler asked him, saying: Good Teacher, what shall I do to
inherit eternal life?The H. T. Anderson New Testament
147
19 And Jesus said to him: Why callest thou me good? None is good
but one, God.
20 Thou knowest the commandments: Thou shalt not commit
adultery. Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not
bear false testimony, Honor thy father and thy mother.
21 And he said: All these have I kept from youth.
22 But Jesus, hearing, said to him: Yet lackest thou one thing: sell all
that thou hast, and distribute to the poor and thou shalt have
treasure in the heavens, and come follow me.
23 But hearing these things, he became very sad; for he was very rich.
24 But seeing him, Jesus said: How hardly do they that have riches
enter into the kingdom of God:
25 for it is easier for a camel to go in through the eye of a needle,
than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.
26 And they that heard said: Who then can be saved?
27 But he said: Things impossible with men are possible with God.
28 And Peter said: Behold, we have left our own and followed thee.
29 And he said to them: Verily I say to you, there is no one that has
left house, or wife, or brothers, or parents, or children for the sake of
the kingdom of God,
30 who shall not receive many times more in this time, and in the age
to come, eternal life.
31 And taking the twelve aside, he said to them: Behold, we are going
up to Jerusalem, and all things that are written by the prophets in
reference to the Son of man shall be accomplished;
32 for he shall be delivered to the Gentiles, and shall be derided and
outraged and spit upon;
33 and they shall scourge and kill him, and the third clay he shall
rise.
34 And they understood none of these things; and this saying was
concealed from them; and they knew not the things that were
spoken.
35 And it came to pass as he drew near to Jericho, a blind man sat by
the road begging.
36 And hearing the multitude pass by, he inquired what this meant.
37 And they told him that Jesus the Nazarene was passing by.
38 And he cried out, saying: Jesus, son of David, have mercy on me.
39 But those that went before rebuked him that he should be silent;
but much more did he cry: Son of David, have mercy on me.
40 But Jesus stood and commanded him to be brought to him. And
when he had come near he asked him:
41 What wilt thou that I shall do for thee? And he said: Lord, that I
may receive sight.148
Codex Sinaiticus:
42 And Jesus said to him: Receive sight: thy faith has saved thee.
43 And he immediately received sight, and followed him, glorifying
God. And all the people, seeing it, gave praise to God.
Luke 19
1 And he entered and passed through Jericho.
2 And behold, a man named Zacchaeus, and he was chief publican,
and was rich;
3 and he sought to see Jesus, who he was, and could not from the
multitude, for in stature he was small.
4 And running before, he went up into a sycamore, that he might see
him, for he was about to pass that way.
5 And when he came to the place, Jesus looked up and said to him:
Zacchaeus, make haste and come down; for I must abide to-day at
thy house.
6 And he hastened and came down, and received him joyfully.
7 And seeing it, they all murmured, saying: He has gone in to be
guest with a sinful man.
8 And Zacchaeus stood and said to the Lord: Behold, the half of my
goods, Lord, I give to the poor; and if from any one I have taken any
thing by false accusation, I repay fourfold.
9 And Jesus said to him: This day has salvation come to this house,
inasmuch as he also is a son of Abraham;
10 for the Son of man has come to seek and save the lost.
11 And as they heard these things he also spoke a parable, because he
was near Jerusalem and they thought that the kingdom of God would
immediately appear.
12 He said, therefore: A nobleman went into a distant country, to
receive for himself a kingdom, and return.
13 And he called his ten servants and gave to them ten pounds, and
said to them: Engage in trade till I come.
14 But his citizens hated him, and sent an embassy after him, saying:
We are not willing that this man shall reign over us.
15 And it came to pass when he had returned, having received the
kingdom, he also ordered that those servants to whom he had given
the money should be called to him, that he might know what each
had gained by trading.
16 And the first came to him, saying: Lord, thy pound has gained ten
pounds.
17 And he said to him: Well done, good servant; because, thou hast
been faithful in very little, have authority over ten cities.
18 And the second came, saying: Thy pound, lord, has made five
pounds.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
149
19 And he said also to him: Be thou also over five cities.
20 And the other came, saying: Lord, behold thy pound, which I have
had laid away in a napkin;
21 for I feared thee, because thou art a hard man: thou takest up
what thou didst not deposit, and reapest what thou didst not sow.
22 He says to him: Out of thy own mouth will I judge thee, wicked
servant. Thou knowest that I am a hard man, taking up what I did
not deposit, and reaping what I did not sow.
23 And why gavest thou not my money to the bank? and I on coming
could have collected my own with interest.
24 And he said to those that stood by: Take from him the pound and
give to him that has the ten pounds.
25 And they said to him: Lord, he has ten pounds.
26 I say to you: To every one that has shall be given, but from him
that has not, even that which he has shall be taken away.
27 But these my enemies, that were not willing that I should reign
over them, bring hither and slay them before me.
28 And having said these things, he went before, going up to
Jerusalem.
29 And it came to pass when he came near to Bethphage and
Bethany, at the mount of Olives, he sent two of the disciples,
30 saying: Go into the village opposite, in which, on entering, you
shall find a colt tied, on which no one of men ever sat: loose and
bring him.
31 And if any one ask you: Why loose him? say thus; that the Lord
has need of him.
32 And those that were sent went and found as he had said to them.
33 And as they were loosing the colt, its owners said to them: Why
loose the colt?
34 and they said: Because the Lord has need of him.
35 And they brought him to Jesus, and having thrown their mantles
upon the colt, they set Jesus upon him.
36 And as he went they spread their mantles in the road.
37 But as he was drawing near now to the descent of the mount of
Olives, the whole multitude of the disciples began joyfully to praise
God with a loud voice for all the mighty deeds which they had seen,
38 saying: Blessed be the King in the name of the Lord: in heaven
peace, and glory in the highest.
39 And some of the Pharisees from the multitude said to him:
Teacher, rebuke thy disciples.
40 And he answered and said: I say to you, that if these should be
silent, the stones would cry out.
41 And when he drew near, beholding the city, he wept over it,150
Codex Sinaiticus:
42 saying: If thou hadst known, even thou, even in this thy day, the
things for thy peace; but now they are hid from thy eyes.
43 For days will come upon thee, and thy enemies shall cast up a
mound about thee; and encircle thee round about, and shut thee up
on every side;
44 and level thee with the ground and thy children within thee; and
will not leave within thee a stone upon a stone, because thou knewest
not the time of thy visitation.
45 And entering into the temple he began to cast out those that sold,
46 saying to them: It is written: And my house shall be called a house
of prayer, but you have made it a den of robbers.
47 And he was teaching daily in the temple; and the chief priests and
the scribes and the chief men of the people sought to destroy him,
48 and found not what they could do; for all the people hung
listening upon him.
Luke 20
1 And it came to pass on one of the days, as he was teaching the
people in the temple, and preaching the gospel, the priests and the
scribes, with the elders, came upon him.
2 and spoke, saying to him: Tell us, by what authority doest thou
these things, or who is he that gave thee this authority?
3 But he answered and said to them: I also will ask you a word, and
tell me:
4 The baptism of John, of heaven was it, or of men?
5 And they reasoned among themselves, saying: If we say: Of heaven,
he will reply: Why did you not believe him?
6 But if we say: Of men, all the people will stone us; for they are
persuaded that John was a prophet.
7 And they answered that they knew not whence.
8 And Jesus said to them: Neither tell I you by what authority I do
these things.
9 And he began to speak to the people this parable. A man planted a
vineyard and let it out to vinedressers, and went abroad for a long
time.
10 And at the season he sent to the vinedressers a servant, that they
might give him of the fruit of the vineyard; but the vinedressers
scourged him and sent him forth empty.
11 And he also sent another servant; but they scourged that one also,
and having dishonored him, sent him forth empty.
12 And he also sent a third; but they wounded this one also and cast
him out.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
151
13 And the lord of the vineyard said: What shall I do? I will send my
beloved son: perhaps they will reverence him.
14 But seeing him, the vinedressers reasoned one with another,
saying: This is the heir: let us kill him, that the inheritance may
become ours.
15 And they cast him out of the vineyard and killed him. What then
will the lord of the vineyard do to them?
16 He will come and destroy these vinedressers, and give the
vineyard to others. And hearing, they said: May it not be.
17 But he looked on them and said: What then is this that is written?
A stone that the builders rejected, this became the head of the corner.
18 Every one that falls on that stone shall be broken; but on
whomever it shall fall, it will grind him to dust.
19 And the scribes and the chief priests sought to lay their hands on
him at the same hour, and were afraid of the people; for they knew
that against them he had spoken this parable.
20 And watching closely, they sent spies that feigned themselves to
be just, that they might lay hold on a word of his, so that they could
deliver him up to the power and authority of the governor.
21 And they asked him, saying: Teacher, we know that thou speakest
and teachest rightly, and acceptest not a person, but teachest the way
of God in truth:
22 is it lawful for us to give tribute to Caesar or not?
23 But perceiving their craftiness, he said to them:
24 Show me a denarius. Whose image and superscription has it?
They said: Caesar’s.
25 And he said to them: Therefore render to Caesar the things that
are Caesar’s, and to God the things that are God’s.
26 And they were not able to lay hold of his speech in the presence of
the people; and being astonished at his answer, they were silent.
27 And some of the Sadducees, who deny that there is a resurrection,
came and asked him a question,
28 saying: Teacher, Moses wrote for us, if any one’s brother die
having a wife, and he be without children, that his brother shall take
his wife and raise up offspring for his brother.
29 There were then seven brothers. And the first took a wife and died
without children;
30 and the second
31 and the third took her, and in like manner also the seven left no
children and died.
32 At last the woman also died.
33 The woman then in the resurrection, of which of them shall she be
the wife? For the seven had her as a wife.152
Codex Sinaiticus:
34 And Jesus said to them: The sons of this age marry and are given
in marriage,
35 but they that shall be counted worthy to obtain that age and the
resurrection from the dead, neither marry nor are given in marriage:
36 nor indeed can they die any more, for they are like the angels, and
are sons of God, being sons of the resurrection.
37 But that the dead are raised, even Moses has made known at the
Bush, since he calls the Lord the God of Abraham, and the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob;
38 and he is not a God of the dead, but of the living; for all live to
him.
39 And some of the scribes answered and said: Teacher, thou hast
well said.
40 For no one again ventured to ask him another question.
41 But he said to them: How say they that Christ is David’s son,
42 for David himself says in the book of Psalms: The Lord said to my
Lord: Sit at my right hand
43 till I make thy enemies thy footstool?
44 David then calls him Lord; and how is he his son?
45 But as all the people were hearing, he said to the disciples:
46 Beware of the scribes that delight to walk about in robes, and love
salutations in the markets, and first seats in the synagogues, and first
places at suppers;
47 who eat up the houses of widows, and for a pretext make long
prayers: these shall receive greater condemnation.
Luke 21
1 And looking up, he saw the rich throwing their gifts into the
treasury.
2 And he saw a widow, a needy one, throw in thither two mites,
3 and he said: Truly I say to you that this poor widow has thrown in
more than they all;
4 for all these out of their abundance have thrown in among the gifts,
but she out of her poverty has thrown in all the living that she had.
5 And as some were speaking of the temple that it was adorned with
goodly stones and offerings, he said:
6 As to these things that you see, days will come in which there shall
not be left a stone upon a stone, that shall not be thrown down.
7 And they asked him, saying: Teacher, when then shall these things
be? and what the sign when these things shall be accomplished?
8 And he said: Take heed that you be not deceived; for many will
come in my name, saying: I am he, and the time is at hand: go not
after them.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
153
9 But when you hear of wars and tumults, be not alarmed; for these
things must take place first, but not immediately the end.
10 Then he said to them: Nation shall rise against nation, and
kingdom against kingdom:
11 great earthquakes also shall there be, and in places famines and
pestilences, fearful sights also shall there be, and great signs from
heaven.
12 But before all these they shall lay their hands on you and
persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues and prisons,
being brought before kings and governors for the sake of my name:
13 it shall turn out to you for testimony.
14 Resolve therefore in your hearts that you meditate not beforehand
to make a defense;
15 for I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries
shall not be able to resist or gainsay.
16 But you shall be delivered up both by parents and brothers and
relatives and friends, and some of you they shall put to death,
17 and you shall be hated by all because of my name.
18 And yet a hair from your head shall not be lost:
19 in your endurance preserve your souls.
20 But when you see Jerusalem encompassed by armies, then know
that the desolation of it is near.
21 Then let those in Judea flee to the mountains, and those in the
midst of it go out, and those in the country not enter into it;
22 for days of vengeance are these for the fulfilling of all things that
are written.
23 Alas for them that are with child and them that give suck in those
days; for there shall be great distress on the land and wrath on this
people;
24 and they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led away
captive into all nations, and Jerusalem shall be trod down by
Gentiles, till the times of the Gentiles shall have been fulfilled.
25 And there shall be signs in the sun and the moon and the stars,
and on earth distress of nations in perplexity at the roaring of the sea
and the waves,
26 men failing in heart for fear and expectation of things coming on
the habitable land; for the powers of the heavens shall be shaken.
27 And then shall they see the Son of man coming on a cloud with
power and great glory.
28 But when these things begin to take place, look up and lift up your
heads, because your redemption draws near.
29 And he spoke a parable to them: See the fig-tree and all the trees:154
Codex Sinaiticus:
30 when they now put forth leaves, seeing it you know of yourselves
that summer is now near.
31 So also you, when you see these things coming to pass, know that
the kingdom of God is near.
32 Verily I say to you: This generation shall not pass away till all
these things shall have been accomplished.
33 Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass
away.
34 But take heed to yourselves lest perhaps your hearts become
heavy with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and the anxieties of life, and
that day come upon you suddenly
35 like a snare; for it shall come upon all that dwell on the face of all
the land.
36 But watch at every time, praying that you may have strength to
escape all these things that are about to take place, and to stand
before the Son of man.
37 And he was teaching in the temple during the day, but he went out
and spent the night in the mount of Olives.
38 And all the people came early to him in the temple to hear him.
Luke 22
1 But the feast of unleavened bread, which is called passover, drew
near;
2 and the chief priests and scribes sought how they might destroy
him; for they feared the people.
3 But Satan entered into Judas called Iscariot, who was of the
number of the twelve;
4 and he went away and conferred with the chief priests and captains
how he might deliver him up to them.
5 And they were glad, and agreed to give him money;
6 and he consented, and sought an opportunity to deliver him up to
them in the absence of the multitude
7 And the day of unleavened bread came, on which the passover must
be killed;
8 and he sent Peter and John, saying: Go and prepare for us the
passover, that we may eat.
9 And they said to him: Where wilt thou that we make ready?
10 And he said to them: Behold, after you have gone into the city,
there shall meet you a man carrying a pitcher of water; follow him
into the house that he enters;
11 and you shall say to the master of the house: The Teacher says to
thee: Where is the guest-chamber where I may eat the passover with
my disciples?The H. T. Anderson New Testament
155
12 And he will show you a large upper room furnished: there make
ready.
13 And they went and found as he had said to them, and prepared the
passover.
14 And when the hour had come, he reclined at table, and the
apostles with him.
15 And he said to them: With desire have I desired to eat this
passover with you before I suffer;
16 for I say to you that I will no more eat it till it is fulfilled in the
kingdom of God.
17 And having taken a cup and given thanks, he said: Take this and
divide it among yourselves;
18 for I say to you that I will not drink henceforth of the fruit of the
vine till the kingdom of God shall have corner
19 And having taken bread and given thanks, he broke and gave to
them, saying: This is my body, that is given for you: this do in
remembrance of me.
20 And the cup in like manner, after he had supped, saying: This cup
is the new covenant in my blood, that is poured out for you.
21 But behold, the hand of him that delivers me up is with me on the
table.
22 For indeed the Son of man goes according to that which is
determined, but alas for that man by whom he is delivered up.
23 And they began to inquire among themselves which of them it
might be that was about to do this thing.
24 And there had been also a contention among them as to which of
them was thought to be greatest.
25 But he said to them: The kings of the nations exercise lordship
over them, and they that have authority over them are called
benefactors:
26 you however shall not be so, but he that is the greatest among you,
let him become as the youngest, and he that leads as he that serves.
27 For which is greater, he that reclines at table or he that serves? Is
not he that reclines at table? But I in the midst of you am as he that
serves.
28 But you are they that have continued steadily with me in my trials.
29 And I appoint to you as my Father has appointed to me a
kingdom,
30 that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit on
thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
31 Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has greatly desired you that he may
sift you as wheat;
32 but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. And thou, when
thou hast turned to me, strengthen thy brethren.156
Codex Sinaiticus:
33 And he said to him: Lord, with thee I am ready to go both to
prison and to death.
34 But he said: I say to thee, Peter, a cock shall not crow this day, till
thou shalt have three times denied that thou knowest me.
35 And he said to them: When I sent you forth without purse and bag
and sandals, needed you any thing? They said: Nothing.
36 And he said to them: But now, he that has a purse, let him take it;
in like manner, also a bag; and he that has no sword, let him sell his
garment and buy.
37 For I say to you that this that is written must be fulfilled in me;
this: And with the lawless was he numbered; for that concerning me
has an end.
38 And they said: Lord, behold, here are two swords. And he said to
them: It is enough.
39 And going out, he went according to custom to the mount of
Olives; and the disciples also followed him.
40 And when he had come to the place he said to them: Pray that you
enter not into temptation.
41 And he withdrew from them about a stone’s throw, and kneeling
down he prayed,
42 saying: Father, if thou art willing to remove this cup from me; yet,
not my will, but thine, be done.
43 And there appeared to him an angel from heaven, strengthening
him.
44 And being in an agony, he prayed more earnestly. And his sweat
became like great drops of blood falling to the ground.
45 And he arose from prayer, came to the disciples, and found them
sleeping because of grief,
46 and said to them: Why sleep? arise and pray, that you may not
enter into temptation.
47 While he was yet speaking, behold, a multitude, and he that was
called Judas, one of the twelve, went before them, and came near to
Jesus to kiss him.
48 And Jesus said to him: Judas, dost thou deliver up the Son of man
with a kiss?
49 But they about him, seeing what would be, said: Lord, shall we
smite with the sword?
50 And some one of them struck the servant of the chief priest and
cut off his right ear.
51 But Jesus answered and said: Let me alone till this, and he
touched his ear and healed him.
52 And Jesus said to the chief priests and captains of the temple and
elders that had come to him: As against a robber you have come
forth, with swords and clubs:The H. T. Anderson New Testament
157
53 while I was with you a daily in the temple, you stretched not forth
your hands against me. But this is your hour, and the authority of
darkness.
54 And they took him, and led and brought him into the house of the
chief priest; but Peter followed at a distance.
55 And after they had kindled a fire in the midst of the court, and
were sitting together, Peter sat in the midst of them.
56 And a maidservant saw him sitting at the fire, and, looking
earnestly on him, said: This man also was with him.
57 But he denied him, saying: Woman, I know him not.
58 And after a little another saw him and said: Thou also art of them.
But Peter said: Man, I am not.
59 And after an interval of about one hour some other confidently
affirmed, saying: Of a truth this man also was with him; for he is a
Galilean.
60 But Peter said: Man, I know not what thou sayest. And
immediately, while he was yet speaking, a cock crew;
61 and the Lord turned and looked upon Peter; and Peter
remembered the word of the Lord, as he had said to him: Before a
cock shall have crowed this day, thou shalt deny me three times.
62 And he went out and wept bitterly.
63 And the men that held him derided him, striking him;
64 and having blindfolded him, they asked, saying: Prophesy: who is
he that struck thee?
65 And many other things did they blasphemously say to him.
66 And when it was day, there came together the eldership of the
people, chief priests also and scribes, and they led him away to their
Sanhedrim, saying: If thou art the Christ, tell us.
67 And he said to them: If I tell you, you will not believe;
68 and if I ask, you will not answer.
69 But from this time shall the Son of man be sitting on the right
hand of the power of God.
70 And they all said: Thou art then the Son of God? He said to them:
You say it, for I am.
71 And they said: What further need have we of testimony? For we
ourselves have heard from his mouth.
Luke 23
1 And the whole number of them rose and led him to Pilate.
2 And they began to accuse him, saying: We found this man turning
our nation away, and forbidding to pay tribute to Caesar, and saying
that he himself is Christ a king.158
Codex Sinaiticus:
3 And Pilate asked him, saying: Art thou the King of the Jews? And
he answered and said to him: Thou sayest.
4 But Pilate said to the chief priests and the multitudes: I find no
fault in this man.
5 But they were vehement, saying: He excites the people, teaching
throughout the whole of Judea, even beginning from Galilee, to this
place.
6 But Pilate, hearing, inquired if the man were a Galilean;
7 and learning that he was from Herod’s jurisdiction, he sent him up
to Herod, who was also in Jerusalem in those days.
8 And Herod, when he saw Jesus, was exceeding glad; for he had for
a long time desired to see him, because he had heard of him, and
hoped to see some sign done by him.
9 And he questioned him with many words; but he answered him
nothing.
10 And the chief priests and the scribes stood, vehemently accusing
him.
11 But Herod also, with his men of war having set him at naught and
mocked him, put on him a splendid robe and sent him back to Pilate.
12 And on the same day Herod and Pilate became friends to each
other; for before they had been at enmity between themselves.
13 But Pilate, having called together the chief priests and the rulers
and the people,
14 said to them: You have brought to me this man as turning the
people away; and behold, I, having examined him in your presence,
have found in this man no fault as to the things which you charge
against him.
15 No, nor even Herod; for he has sent him back to us; and behold,
nothing worthy of death has been done by him.
16 I will therefore chastise and release him.
17 [no verse]
18 But they cried out all at once, saying: Away with this man, and
release to us Barabbas:
19 who for a certain insurrection made in the city and for murder had
been cast into prison.
20 Again, however, Pilate called to them, wishing to release Jesus.
21 But they cried against it, saying: Crucify, crucify him.
22 But the third time spoke he to them: Why, what evil has he done?
No cause of death have I found in him: I will therefore chastise and
release him.
23 But they were urgent with loud cries, demanding that he should
be crucified; and their cries prevailed.
24 And Pilate gave sentence that their demand should go into effect.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
159
25 And he released him that for insurrection and murder had been
cast into prison, whom they chose; but Jesus he delivered up to their
will.
26 And as they led him away, laying hold on Simon a certain
Cyrenian, as he came from the country, they laid on him the cross
that he might bear it after Jesus.
27 And there followed him a great multitude of the people, and of
women that bewailed and lamented him.
28 But Jesus turned to them and said: Daughters of Jerusalem, weep
not for me; but weep for yourselves and for your children;
29 for behold, there are coming days in which they shall say: Blessed
are the barren, and the wombs that never bore, and the breasts that
did not give suck.
30 Then shall they begin to say to the mountains: Fall on us, and to
the hills: Cover us;
31 for if they do these things in the green tree, what shall be done in
the dry?
32 And there were led others also, two evildoers, to be crucified with
him.
33 And when they came to the place that is called Skull, there they
crucified him and the evildoers, one on the right and the other on the
left.
34 But Jesus said: Father, forgive them; for they know not what they
do. And dividing his clothing among them, they cast lots.
35 And the people stood looking on; but the rulers scoffed, saying:
Others he saved, let him save himself, if he is the Christ, the chosen
of God.
36 And the soldiers also derided him, coming to him, offering him
vinegar,
37 and saying: If thou art the King of the Jews, save thyself.
38 And there was also a superscription over him: THIS IS THE KING
OF THE JEWS.
39 And one of the evildoers that were hanged reviled him: Art not
thou the Christ? save thyself and us.
40 But the other, answering, rebuked him and said: Dost not even
thou fear God, seeing that thou art in the same condemnation?
41 And we indeed justly, for we are receiving the due reward of what
we have done; but this man has done nothing amiss.
42 And he said: Jesus, remember me when thou comest in thy
kingdom.
43 And he said to him: Verily I say to thee, this day thou shalt be with
me in Paradise.
44 And it was now about the sixth hour, and darkness came over the
whole land till the ninth hour,160
Codex Sinaiticus:
45 the sun having failed; and the veil of the temple was rent in the
midst.
46 And Jesus cried with a loud voice, and said: Father, into thy hands
I commit my spirit. And having said this, he expired.
47 And the centurion, seeing what had taken place, glorified God,
saying: Certainly this man was righteous.
48 And all the multitudes that had come together to that scene,
having looked upon the things that were done, returned, smiting
their breasts.
49 And all his acquaintance, and women that had followed him from
Galilee, stood at a distance, looking upon these things.
50 And behold, a man named Joseph, who was a counselor, also a
good and righteous man,
51 he had not consented to their counsel and deed of Arimathea, a
city of the Jews, who looked for the kingdom of God:
52 this man came to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus;
53 and having taken it down, he wrapped it in linen, and laid it in a
sepulcher hewed in rock, where no one had yet lain.
54 And it was the day of the preparation, and the sabbath was
beginning.
55 And women that had come up with him out of Galilee followed
and observed the sepulcher, and how his body was laid;
56 and having returned, they prepared spices and ointments; and
they rested indeed on the sabbath, according to the commandment.
Luke 24
1 But on the first of the week, very early in the morning, they came to
the sepulcher, bringing the spices that they had prepared.
2 And they found the stone rolled away from the sepulcher;
3 but entering, they found not the body of the Lord Jesus.
4 And it came to pass as they were perplexed about this, behold, two
men stood by them in bright clothing
5 and the women being afraid and bowing their faces to the earth the
angels said to them: Why seek among the dead for him that lives?
6 He is not here, but has risen. Remember how he spoke to you while
he was yet in Galilee,
7 saying of the Son of man that he must be delivered into the hands
of sinful men, and be crucified, and rise on the third day.
8 And they remembered his words,
9 and returned from the sepulcher and told all these things to the
eleven and to all the rest.
10 And they were Mary Magdalene and Joanna and Mary the mother
of James; and the rest with them told these things to the apostles.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
161
11 And these words appeared in their sight as idle tales, and they
believed them not.
12 But Peter arose and ran to the sepulcher, and stooping down, he
saw the linen clothes lying by themselves; and he departed,
wondering in himself at that which had come to pass.
13 And behold, two of them were going on the same day to a village
named Emmaus, distant from Jerusalem sixty furlongs;
14 and they were conversing one with another about all these things
that had happened.
15 And it came to pass while they were conversing and discussing,
Jesus himself came near and went with them;
16 but their eyes were held so that they did not know him.
17 And he said to them: What matters are these that you interchange
one with another as you walk? And they stood still with countenances
sad.
18 But one, whose name was Cleopas, answering, said to him: Dost
thou only dwell as a stranger in Jerusalem and hast not known the
things that have come to pass in it in these days?
19 And he said to them: What things? And they said to him: The
things concerning Jesus the Nazarene, who became a man, a prophet
mighty in deed and word before God and all the people,
20 and how the chief priests and our rulers delivered him up to the
condemnation of death and crucified him.
21 But we were hoping that it had been he that was about to redeem
Israel. Yet even with all this, this is the third day since these things
were done.
22 But also some women of our company astonished us; having been
early at the sepulcher,
23 and not finding his body, they came, saying that they had also
seen a vision of angels, who said that he was alive.
24 And some of those with us went to the sepulcher, and found it so
even as the women had said, but him they saw not.
25 And he said to them: O without understanding, and slow of heart
to believe in all things that the prophets have spoken.
26 Was it not needful that the Christ should suffer these things and
enter into his glory?
27 And beginning from Moses and from all the prophets, he
explained to them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself.
28 And they drew near to the village whither they were going, and he
made a show of going further;
29 and they constrained him, saying: Abide with us; for it is toward
evening, and the day has now declined. And he went in to abide with
them.162
Codex Sinaiticus:
30 And it came to pass as he reclined at table with them, he took
bread, blessed and broke and gave to them;
31 but their eyes were opened, and they recognized him; and he
vanished out of their sight.
32 And they said one to another: Was not our heart burning within
us, as he spoke to us on the way, as he opened to us the scriptures?
33 And they rose up the same hour and returned to Jerusalem, and
found the eleven and those with them collected together,
34 saying that the Lord has certainly risen and has appeared to
Simon.
35 And they told what had taken place on the way, and how he was
made known to them in the breaking of bread.
36 But while they were talking of these things, he himself stood in the
midst of them.
37 And being terrified and becoming fearful, they thought that they
saw a spirit.
38 And he said to them: Why are you troubled, and why do thoughts
arise in your hearts?
39 See my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me and see;
for a spirit has not flesh and bones as you see me have.
40 And when he had said this, he showed them his hands and his
feet.
41 But while they believed not for joy, and wondered, he said to
them: Have you anything here to eat?
42 And they gave him a piece of broiled fish;
43 and he took it and ate in their presence.
44 And he said to them: These are my words, which I spoke to you
while I was yet with you, that all things that are written in the law of
Moses and the prophets and the psalms concerning me must be
fulfilled.
45 Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand
the scriptures;
46 and he said to them: Thus it is written, that the Christ should
suffer and rise from the dead on the third day,
47 and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in
his name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.
48 You are witnesses of these things.
49 And I send the promise of my Father upon you; but do you
continue in the city, till you be clothed with power from on high.
50 And he led them out as far as Bethany, and having lifted up his
hands, he blessed them.
51 And it came to pass, as he blessed them, he was separated from
them.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
52 And they returned to Jerusalem with great joy,
53 and were continually in the temple praising God.
163164
Codex Sinaiticus:
According to John
John 1
1 In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God.
2 He was in the beginning with God.
3 All things came into being through him, and without him came into
being not one thing that is in being.
4 In him is life, and the life was the light of men.
5 And the light shines in darkness, and the darkness comprehended
it not.
6 There came a man, sent from God; his name was John:
7 this man came for a testimony, that he might testify of the light,
that all through him might believe.
8 He was not the light, but came that he might testify of the light.
9 That was the true light, which, coming into the world, gives light to
every man.
10 He was in the world, and the world came into being through him,
and the world knew him not.
11 He came to his own country, and his own people received him not.
12 But as many as received him, to them gave he the right to become
children of God, to those that believe on his name,
13 who were born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of a man, but of God.
14 And the Word became flesh, and tabernacled among us, and we
beheld his glory, the glory as of the Only Begotten of the Father, full
of grace and truth.
15 John testified of him and cried, saying: This was he of whom I
said: He that comes after me has been advanced before me, because
he was before me.
16 For of his fullness have we all received, and grace for grace;
17 for the law was given through Moses, the grace and the truth came
through Jesus Christ.
18 No one has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, who is in
the bosom of the Father, he has made him known.
19 And the testimony of John is this, when the Jews of Jerusalem
sent priests and Levites to ask him: Who art thou?
20 And he confessed and denied not, and confessed: I am not the
Christ.
21 And they asked him: What then? Art thou Elijah? He said: I am
not. Art thou the prophet? and he answered: No.
22 They then said to him: Who art thou? that we may give an answer
to those that sent us: what sayest thou of thyself?The H. T. Anderson New Testament
165
23 He replied: I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness: Make
straight the way of the Lord, as said Isaiah the prophet.
24 And some had been sent from the Pharisees,
25 and they asked him, and said to him: Why then dost thou baptize,
if thou art not the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the prophet?
26 John answered them, saying: I baptize in water: in the midst of
you there stands whom you know not,
27 he that comes after me, the latchet of whose sandal I am not
worthy to loose.
28 These things were done in Bethany beyond the Jordan, where
John was baptizing.
29 On the next day he sees Jesus coming to him, and says: Behold,
the Lamb of God, that takes away the sin of the world.
30 This is he of whom I said: After me comes a man who has been
advanced before me, because he was before me.
31 And I knew him not, but that he might be manifested to Israel,
therefore have I come baptizing in water.
32 And John testified, saying: I saw the Spirit descending, like a
dove, from heaven, and it abode upon him.
33 And I knew him not, but he that sent me to baptize in water, he
said to me: On whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and
abiding on him, this is he that baptizeth in the Holy Spirit.
34 And I have seen, and I have testified that this is the Son of God.
35 On the next day again John stood, and two of his disciples,
36 and looking upon Jesus as he was walking, he says: Behold, the
Lamb of God!
37 The two disciples heard him speaking, and followed Jesus.
38 Jesus turned and saw them following, and said to them:
39 What seek you? They said to him: Rabbi (which is called, when
translated, Teacher), where abidest thou?
40 He says to them: Come and see. They came therefore and saw
where he abode, and continued with him that day: it was about the
tenth hour.
41 It was Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, one of the two that had
heard from John and followed him:
42 he first finds his own brother Simon and says to him: We have
found the Messiah, which is, translated, Christ.
43 He brought him to Jesus. Looking upon him, Jesus said: Thou art
Simon the son of Joanna: thou shalt be called Cephas, which is,
translated. Peter.
44 On the next day he wished to go forth into Galilee, and found
Philip. And Jesus said to him: Follow me.
45 But Philip was from Bethsaida, of the city of Andrew and Peter.166
Codex Sinaiticus:
46 Philip finds Nathaniel, and says to him: We have found him of
whom wrote Moses in the law, and the prophets, Jesus, who is of
Nazareth, the son of Joseph.
47 Nathaniel said to him: Can any thing good come out of Nazareth?
Philip says to him: Come and see.
48 Jesus saw Nathaniel coming to him, and said concerning him:
Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile.
49 Nathaniel said to him: Whence knowest thou me? Jesus answered
and said to him: Before Philip called thee, whilst thou wast under the
fig tree, I saw thee.
50 Nathaniel answered him: Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, thou art
King of Israel.
51 Jesus answered and said to him: Because I said to thee that I saw
thee under the fig tree, believest thou? Thou shalt see greater things
than these.
52 And he said to him: Verily, verily, I say to you, you shall see
heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending
upon the Son of man.
John 2
1 And on the third day a marriage took place in Cana of Galilee, and
the mother of Jesus was there;
2 and Jesus also was called, and his disciples, to the marriage.
3 And they had no wine, because the wine of the marriage feast had
failed. Then said the mother of Jesus to him: They have no wine.
4 Jesus said to her: Woman, what have I to do with thee? My hour
has not yet come.
5 His mother said to the waiters: Whatever he says to you, do.
6 And according to the purification of the Jews, there were lying
there six water vessels of stone, containing two or three baths each.
7 Jesus says to them: Fill the water vessels with water. And they filled
them to the brim.
8 And he says to them: Draw out now, and carry to the master of the
feast. And they carried it.
9 But when the master of the feast had tasted the water that had been
made wine, and knew not whence it was, but the waiters that drew
the water knew, the master of the feast called the bridegroom,
10 and said to him: Every man at the first sets out the good wine; and
when they have become drunk, the inferior: thou hast kept the good
wine till now.
11 This beginning of signs did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and
manifested his glory, and his disciples believed on him.
12 After this he went down to Capernaum, he and his mother and his
brothers and his disciples, and they remained there not many days.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
167
13 And the Passover of the Jews was near, and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem.
14 And he found in the temple those that sold oxen, and sheep, and
doves, and the moneychangers sitting;
15 and having made a scourge of cords, he drove all out of the temple,
the sheep also and the oxen, and poured out the money of the
money-changers, and overturned the tables;
16 and to those that sold doves he said: Take these things hence;
make not my Father’s house a house of merchandise.
17 The disciples remembered that it is written: Zeal for thy house
consumes me.
18 The Jews then answered and said to him: What sign showest thou
to us, that thou doest these things?
19 Jesus answered and said to them: Destroy this temple, and in
three days I will raise it up.
20 The Jews therefore said: Forty and six years was this temple in
building, and in three days wilt thou raise it up?
21 But he spoke of the temple of his body.
22 When therefore he had risen from the dead, his disciples
remembered that he had said this, and they believed the Scripture
and the word that Jesus had spoken.
23 But when he was in Jerusalem on the Passover on the feast, many
believed on his name, seeing his signs which he did;
24 but Jesus did not trust himself to them, because he knew all men,
25 and because he had no need that any one should testify
concerning man; for he himself knew what was in man.
John 3
1 But there was a man of the Pharisees, his name was Nicodemus, a
ruler of the Jews;
2 he came to him by night and said to him: Rabbi, we know that from
God thou hast come as a teacher; for no one can do these signs that
thou doest, unless God be with him.
3 Jesus answered and said to him: Verily, verily, I say to thee, unless
a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.
4 Nicodemus says to him: How can a man be born when he is old?
Can he enter the second time into his mother’s womb and be born?
5 Jesus answered: Verily, verily, I say to thee, Unless a man be born
of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of the
heavens.
6 That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of
the Spirit is spirit.
7 Wonder not that I said to thee: You must be born again.168
Codex Sinaiticus:
8 The wind blows where it pleases, and the sound of it thou hearest,
but thou knowest not whence it comes and whither it goes: so is
every one that is born of the Spirit.
9 Nicodemus answered and said to him: How can these things take
place?
10 Jesus answered and said to him: Art thou the teacher of Israel and
knowest not these things?
11 Verily, verily, I say to thee, that which we know we speak, and that
which we have seen we testify, and our testimony you receive not.
12 If I have told you earthly things and you believe not, how will you
believe if I tell you of heavenly things?
13 And no one has ascended into heaven but he that came down from
heaven, the Son of man, who is in heaven.
14 And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the
Son of man be lifted up;
15 that every one that believes in him may have life eternal.
16 For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whoever believes on him might not perish, but have life eternal.
17 For God sent not the Son into the world to condemn the world, hut
that the world might be saved through him.
18 He that believes on him is not condemned: he that believes not is
condemned already, because he has not believed on the name of the
only begotten Son of God.
19 But the condemnation is this, that light has come into the world,
and men loved darkness rather than light; for their works were evil.
20 For every one that does evil hates the light, and comes not to the
light, lest his works may be reproved;
21 but he that does the truth comes to the light that his works may be
made manifest that they are wrought in God.
22 After this came Jesus and his disciples into the land of Judea, and
there he abode with them and baptized.
23 But John also was baptizing in Enon near Salem, because much
water was there; and they came and were baptized;
24 for not yet had John been cast into prison.
25 There arose therefore a discussion, on the part of some of the
disciples of John, with a Jew, about purification.
26 And they came to John and said to him: Rabbi, he that was with
thee beyond the Jordan, to whom thou hast testified, behold, he
baptizes and all come to him.
27 John answered and said: A man cannot receive any thing unless it
be given him from heaven.
28 You yourselves will testify for me that I said: I am not the Christ,
but that I am sent before him.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
169
29 He that has the bride is the bridegroom; but the friend of the
bridegroom, who stands and hears him, greatly rejoices because of
the voice of the bridegroom. This my joy therefore has been fulfilled.
30 He must increase, but I must become less.
31 He that comes from above is over all: he that is of the earth is of
the earth and speaks of the earth. He that comes from heaven
32 testifies of what he has seen and heard, and his testimony no one
receives.
33 He that has received his testimony has attested that God is true.
34 For he whom God sent speaks the words of God; for not by
measure does he give the Spirit.
35 The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hand.
36 He that believes on the Son has life eternal; he that believes not
the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.
John 4
1 When therefore Jesus knew that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus
was making and baptizing more disciples than John.
2 though Jesus himself baptized not, but his disciples baptized.
3 he left Judea and went away again into Galilee.
4 But he must needs go through Samaria.
5 He comes therefore to a city of Samaria called Sychar, near the
place which Jacob gave to his son Joseph.
6 And Jacob’s well was there. Jesus then, having been wearied with
the journey, sat thus on the well: it was about the sixth hour.
7 There comes a woman from Samaria to draw water. Jesus says to
her: Give me to drink.
8 For his disciples had gone away into the city, to buy food,
9 The woman, who was a Samaritan, says to him: How dost thou,
being a Jew, ask drink of me, who am a woman of Samaria?
10 Jesus answered and said to her: If thou hadst known the gift of
God, and who he is that says to thee: Give me to drink, thou wouldst
have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water.
11 The woman says to him: Sir, thou hast nothing to draw with, and
the well is deep: whence hast thou the living water?
12 Art thou greater than our father Jacob, who gave us the well, and
drank of it himself and his sons and his cattle?
13 Jesus answered and said to her: Everyone that drinks of this water
shall thirst again;
14 but whoever shall drink of the water that I shall give him shall
never thirst, but the water that I shall give him shall become in him a
fountain of water springing up to life eternal.170
Codex Sinaiticus:
15 The woman says to him: Sir, give me this water, that I thirst not,
neither come hither to draw.
16 He says to her: Go, call thy husband and come hither.
17 The woman answered and said: I have no husband, Jesus says to
her: Well hast thou said: I have no husband;
18 for thou hast had five husbands, and he whom thou now hast is
not thy husband. This thou hast spoken truly.
19 The woman says to him: Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet.
20 Our fathers worshipped in this mountain; and you say that in
Jerusalem is the place where we ought to worship.
21 Jesus says to her: Believe me, woman, that the hour comes when
neither in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem, shall you worship the
Father.
22 You worship you know not what; we worship what we know, for
salvation is of the Jews;
23 but the hour comes and now is, when the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in spirit and in truth; for the Father seeks such to
worship him.
24 God is spirit; and they that worship must worship in spirit and
truth.
25 The woman says to him: I know that Messiah comes, who is called
Christ: when he has come, he will tell us all things.
26 Jesus says to her: I that speak to thee am he.
27 And on this came his disciples, and wondered that he talked with
the woman: no one, however, said: What seekest thou or why talkest
thou with her?
28 The woman therefore left her water-pot and went away into the
city, and said to the men:
29 Come, see a man that has told me all things that I have done; is
this the Christ?
30 They went forth from the city and came to him.
31 In n the meantime his disciples besought him, saying: Rabbi, eat.
32 But he said to them: I have food to eat that you know not of.
33 Then said the disciples one to another: Has any one brought him
food?
34 Jesus says to them: My food is to do the will of him that sent me,
and finish his work.
35 Say you a not that there are yet four months, and harvest comes?
Behold, I say to you, lift up your eyes and behold the fields, that they
are white for the harvest.
36 Already he that reaps receives reward and gathers fruit for eternal
life, that he that sows and he that reaps may rejoice together.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
171
37 For in this is the saying true, that there is one that sows and
another that reaps.
38 I have sent you to reap that on which you have not labored: others
have labored, and you have entered into their labor.
39 And many of the Samaritans of that city believed on him because
of the word of the woman who testified that he told me all things that
I had done.
40 When therefore the Samaritans came to him, they besought him
to abide with them; and he abode; there two days.
41 And many more believed because of his word,
42 and said to the woman: We no longer believe because of thy
saying; for we ourselves have heard, and know that this is in truth the
Saviour of the world.
43 But after the two days he went forth thence into Galilee.
44 For Jesus himself testified that a prophet has no honor in his own
country.
45 When therefore he came into Galilee, the Galileans received him,
having seen all things that he did in Jerusalem at the feast; for they
also had come to the feast.
46 He came then again into Cana of Galilee, where he had made the
water wine. And there was in Capernaum a nobleman, whose son was
sick;
47 he, hearing that Jesus had come out of Judea into Galilee, came to
him, and besought him that he would come down and restore his son
to health; for he was about to die.
48 Jesus therefore said to him: Unless you see signs and wonders,
you will not believe.
49 The nobleman said to him: Sir, come down before my child die.
50 Jesus said to him: Go, thy son lives. The man believed the word
that Jesus had spoken to him, and went.
51 And as he was now going down, his servants met him and told
him: Thy son lives.
52 He then inquired of them the hour in which he began to mend:
they then said to him: Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left
him.
53 The father therefore knew that it was in that hour in which Jesus
had said to him: Thy son lives; and he himself believed and all his
house.
54 This again is the second sign that Jesus did on coming out of
Judea into Galilee.
John 5
1 After this was the feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem.172
Codex Sinaiticus:
2 And there is in Jerusalem at the sheep gate a pool, which is called
in Hebrew, Bethesda, having five porches.
3 In these lay a multitude of sick persons, blind, lame, withered.
4 [no verse]
5 But there was a man there that had been sick thirty-eight years.
6 Jesus saw him lying, and, knowing that he had already been sick a
long time, said to him: Wilt thou be restored to health?
7 The sick man answered him: Sir, I have no man, that when the
water is stirred he may put me into the pool; but while I am coming
another goes down before me.
8 Jesus says to him: Arise, take up thy bed, and walk.
9 And the man was restored to health, and took up his bed and
walked; but a sabbath was on that day.
10 The Jews then said to him that had been cured: It is a sabbath,
and it is not lawful for thee to carry thy bed.
11 He answered them: He that made me well said to me: Take up thy
bed and walk.
12 They asked him: Who is the man that said to thee: Take up and
walk?
13 But the sick man knew not who he was; for Jesus had withdrawn,
as a multitude was in the place.
14 After this Jesus finds him in the temple; and he said to him:
Behold, thou hast been restored to health: sin no more, lest
something worse befall thee.
15 The man went away and told the Jews that it was Jesus that had
made him well.
16 And for this reason the Jews persecuted Jesus, because he did
these things on the sabbath.
17 But he answered them: My Father works till now, and I work.
18 For this reason did the Jews seek the more to kill him, because he
not only broke the sabbath, but also called God his own Father,
making himself equal to God.
19 Jesus therefore answered and said to them: Verily, verily, I say to
you, The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father
do; for whatever he does, these also the Son does in like manner,
20 For the Father loves the Son and shows him all things that he
himself does; and greater works than these will he show him, that
you may wonder.
21 For as the Father raises the dead and makes them alive, so also the
Son makes alive whom he will.
22 For neither does the Father judge any one, but has given all
judicial authority to the Son,The H. T. Anderson New Testament
173
23 that all may honor the Son as they honor the Father. He that
honors not the Son honors not the Father who sent him.
24 Verily, verily, I say to you, that he that hears my word and believes
on him that sent me has life eternal, and comes not into
condemnation, but has passed out of death into life.
25 Verily, verily, I say to you, that the hour comes, and now is, when
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear
shall live.
26 For as the Father has life in himself, so has he given to the Son
also to have life in himself.
27 And he has given him authority to execute judgment, because he
is the Son of man.
28 Wonder not at this, for the hour comes in which all that are in the
graves shall hear his voice,
29 and shall come forth, those that have done good, to the
resurrection of life; those that have done evil, to the resurrection of
condemnation.
30 I can do nothing of myself: as I hear I judge, and my judgment is
righteous, because I seek not my will, but the will of him that sent
me.
31 If I testify of myself, my testimony is not true:
32 there is another that testifies of me, and you know that the
testimony which he testifies of me is true.
33 You have sent to John, and he has testified to the truth;
34 but I receive not testimony from man, but these things I say that
you may be saved.
35 He was the burning and the shining light, and you were willing to
rejoice for an hour in his light.
36 But I have testimony greater than that of John; for the works
which the Father has given me to accomplish, the works themselves
that I do, testify of me that the Father has sent me.
37 And the Father who sent me, he has testified of me: neither his
voice have you heard at any time, nor his shape have you seen,
38 and his word you have not abiding in you, for whom he has sent,
him you believe not.
39 You search the scriptures, because you think that in them you
have eternal life, and they are they that testify of me;
40 and yet you will not come to me that you may have life.
41 I receive not glory from men,
42 but I know you, that you have not the love of God in you.
43 I have come in my Father’s name, and you receive me not: if
another should come in his own name, him you would receive.174
Codex Sinaiticus:
44 How can you believe while receiving glory one from another, and
you seek not the glory that is from the only God?
45 Think not that I will accuse you to the Father: there is he that
accuses you, Moses, in whom you trust.
46 For if you had believed Moses, you would have believed me; for he
wrote of me.
47 But if you believe not his writings, how will you believe my words?
John 6
1 After this Jesus went away beyond the sea of Galilee, which is the
sea of Tiberias;
2 and a great multitude followed him because they saw the signs that
he did in case of the sick.
3 But Jesus went up into the mountain, and there he sat with his
disciples.
4 And the Passover, the feast of the Jews, was near.
5 Jesus then, lifting up his eyes and seeing that a great multitude was
coming to him, said to Philip: Whence can we buy bread, that these
may eat?
6 But this he said to try him; for he himself knew what he was about
to do.
7 Philip answered him: Two hundred denarii worth of bread is not
enough for these, that each one may take some little.
8 One of his disciples, Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, says to
him:
9 There is a lad here who has five barley loaves and two little fishes;
but what are these among so many?
10 Jesus said: Make the men recline. And there was much grass in
the place. The men therefore reclined, in number about five
thousand.
11 Jesus therefore took the loaves, and gave thanks, and gave to those
that reclined; in like manner also of the fishes as much as they
wished.
12 But when they were filled, he said to his disciples: Gather up the
broken pieces that remain, that nothing be lost.
13 They gathered them therefore, and filled twelve traveling-baskets
with broken pieces from the five barley loaves, which remained after
they had eaten.
14 The men therefore, seeing the sign that he had done, said: This is
in truth the prophet that comes into the world.
15 Jesus then, knowing that they were about to come and seize him
to make him king, fled again into the mountain himself alone.
16 But when evening had come, his disciples went down to the sea,The H. T. Anderson New Testament
175
17 and having entered a ship, were going beyond the sea to
Capernaum. But darkness overtook them, and Jesus had not yet
come to them:
18 the sea also arose, because a great wind was blowing.
19 Having rowed therefore about twenty-five or thirty furlongs, they
see Jesus walking on the sea, and coming near the ship, and they
were afraid.
20 But he said to them: It is I, be not afraid.
21 They then willingly received him into the ship, and immediately
the ship was at the land to which they were going.
22 On the morrow the multitude that stood on the other side of the
sea saw that there was no other little ship there but one, and that
Jesus had not entered the ship with his disciples, but his disciples
had gone away alone:
23 however, little ships had come from Tiberias, near the place where
they ate bread when the Lord had given thanks.
24 When, therefore, the multitude saw that Jesus was not there, nor
his disciples, they entered the little ships and came to Capernaum,
seeking Jesus.
25 And having found him on the other side of the sea, they said to
him: Rabbi, when earnest thou hither?
26 Jesus answered them and said: Verily, verily, I say to you, you
seek me not because you saw the signs, but because you ate of the
loaves and were filled.
27 Labor not for the food that perishes, but for the food that abides to
life eternal, which the Son of man gives you; for him has God the
Father attested.
28 They said therefore to him: What must we do that we may work
the works of God?
29 Jesus answered and said to them: This is the work of God, that
you believe on him whom he has sent.
30 They said then to him: What doest thou then as a sign, that we
may see and believe thee; what workest thou?
31 Our fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, as it is written: Bread
from heaven gave he them to eat.
32 Then said Jesus to them: Verily, verily, I say to you, Moses has not
given you the bread from heaven; but my Father gives you the bread
from heaven, the true.
33 For the bread which is God’s is he that comes down from heaven
and gives life to the world.
34 They said therefore to him: Lord, always give us this bread.
35 Jesus then said to them: I am the bread of life: he that comes to
me shall not hunger, and he that believes on me shall never thirst.
36 But I said to you that you have seen and do not believe.176
Codex Sinaiticus:
37 All that the Father gives me shall come to me, and him that comes
to me I will not cast out;
38 for I have come down from heaven, not that I might do my will,
but the will of him that sent me.
39 And this is the will of him that sent me, that I shall lose nothing of
all that he has given me, but shall raise it up in the last day.
40 For this is the will of my Father, that whoever sees the Son and
believes on him may have life eternal, and I shall raise him up in the
last day.
41 The Jews therefore murmured concerning him, because he said: I
am the bread that came down from heaven;
42 and they said: Is not this Jesus the son of Joseph, whose father
and mother we know? How now says this man: I have come down
from heaven?
43 Jesus answered and said to them: Murmur not among yourselves.
44 No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draw him,
and I will raise him up in the last day.
45 It is written in the prophets: And they shall all be taught of God:
every one that has heard from the Father and has learned, comes to
me.
46 Not that any one has seen the Father, but he that is from God, he
has seen the Father.
47 Verily, verily, I say to you, he that believes has life eternal.
48 I am the bread of life.
49 Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness and died:
50 this is the bread that comes down from heaven, that any one may
eat of it and not die.
51 I am the living bread, that came down from heaven: if any one eat
of my bread, he shall live forever; and the bread also that I will give
for the life of the world, is my flesh.
52 The Jews then contended one with another, saying: How can this
man give us his flesh to eat?
53 Jesus therefore said to them: Verily, verily, I say to you, unless
you eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, you have no
life in you.
54 He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood has life eternal, and I
will raise him up in the, last day.
55 For my flesh is true food, and my blood is true drink.
56 He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood abides in me and I in
him.
57 As the living Father sent me, and I live because of the Father, he
also that eats me even he shall live because of me.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
177
58 This is the bread that came down from heaven, not as the fathers
ate and died: he that eats this bread shall live forever.
59 These things spoke he in the synagogue as he taught in
Capernaum.
60 Therefore many of his disciples on hearing it said: A hard saying
is this: who can hear it?
61 But Jesus, knowing in himself that his disciples murmured
concerning this, said to them: Does this offend you?
62 If then you should see the Son of man ascending where he was
before?
63 The spirit is that which makes alive; the flesh profits nothing: the
words that I have spoken to you are spirit, and are life.
64 But there are some of you that believe not. For Jesus knew from
the beginning who they were that believed not, and who it was that
would deliver him up.
65 And he said: For this reason have I said to you that no one can
come to me unless it be given him of the Father.
66 From this time therefore many of his disciples went back and
walked no more with him.
67 Jesus then said to the twelve: Will you also go away?
68 Simon Peter answered him: Lord, to whom shall we go? The
words of eternal life hast thou;
69 and we have believed and known that thou art the Holy One of
God.
70 He answered them: Have I not chosen you twelve? and one of you
is a devil.
71 But he spoke of Judas, son of Simon Tscariot; for he was about to
deliver him up, being one of the twelve.
John 7
1 After this Jesus walked in Galilee; for he would not walk in Judea,
because the Jews sought to kill him.
2 But the feast of the Jews, that of tabernacles, was near.
3 His brothers therefore said to him: Depart hence and go into
Judea, that thy disciples also may see the works that thou doest;
4 for no one does any thing in secret and desires himself to be known
openly. If thou doest these things, make thyself manifest to the
world.
5 For neither did his brothers believe on him.
6 Jesus says to them: My time is not yet present, but your time is
always ready.
7 The world cannot hate you, but me it hates, because I testify of it
that its works are evil.178
Codex Sinaiticus:
8 Do you go up to the feast: I go not up to this feast, because my time
has not yet fully come.
9 Having said these things, he abode in Galilee.
10 But when his brothers had gone up to the feast, then he himself
also went up, not openly, but in secret.
11 The Jews then sought for him at the feast, and said: Where is he?
12 And there was much murmuring concerning him among the
multitude; some said: He is a good man: others said: No, but he
deceives the multitude.
13 No one, however, spoke boldly concerning him, for fear of the
Jews.
14 But now at the middle of the festival Jesus went up into the,
temple and taught.
15 The Jews therefore were astonished, saying: How knows this man
letters, not having learned?
16 Jesus then answered them and said: My teaching is not mine, but
his that sent me:
17 if any one will do his will he shall know of the teaching, whether it
is of God, or I speak of myself.
18 He that speaks of himself seeks his own glory: he that seeks the
glory of him that sent him, he is true, and unrighteousness is not in
him.
19 Has not Moses given you the law? and none of you does the law.
Why do you seek to kill me?
20 The multitude answered: Thou hast a demon: who seekest to kill
thee?
21 Jesus answered and said to them: One work I have done and you
all wonder.
22 Moses has given you circumcision, not that it is of Moses, but of
the fathers, and on the sabbath day you circumcise a man.
23 If a man receives circumcision on the sabbath, that the law of
Moses may not be broken, are you angry with me because I restored
the entire man to health on the sabbath?
24 Judge not, according to appearance, but judge righteous
judgment.
25 Then said some of those of Jerusalem: Is not this he whom they
seek to kill?
26 And lo, he speaks boldly, and they say nothing to him. Have the
rulers then certainly known that this is the Christ?
27 However, we know this man, whence he is; but when the Christ
comes, no one knows whence he is.
28 Jesus therefore cried out in the temple, teaching and saying: You
both know me, and you know whence I am; and I have not come of
myself, but he is true that sent me, whom you know not:The H. T. Anderson New Testament
179
29 I know him, because I am from him and he sent me.
30 They therefore sought to take him, and no one laid his hand on
him, because his hour had not yet come.
31 But many of the multitude believed on him, and said: When Christ
comes, will he do more signs than these that this man does?
32 The Pharisees heard the multitude murmuring these things
concerning him, and the chief priests and the Pharisees sent
attendants that they might take him.
33 Therefore said Jesus: Yet a little while I am with you, and I go to
him that sent me.
34 You shall seek me and shall not find me, and where I am you
cannot come.
35 The Jews therefore said one to another: Whither does this man
intend to go, that we shall not find him? Does he intend to go among
the dispersion of the Greeks and teach the Greeks?
36 What means this word that he spoke: You shall seek me and shall
not find me, and where I am, you cannot come?
37 But on the last day, the great day of the feast, Jesus stood and
cried, saying: If any one thirst, let him come and drink.
38 He that believes on me, as the scripture said, out of his belly shall
flow rivers of living water.
39 But this he spoke of the Spirit which those that believe on him
were about to receive; for the Spirit was not yet, because Jesus had
not yet been glorified.
40 Some of the multitude therefore, hearing these words, said: This
is in truth the prophet;
41 others said: This is the Christ; others said: Does the Christ then
come out of Galilee?
42 Has not the scripture said that the Christ comes of the posterity of
David, and from Bethlehem, the town where David was?
43 There was therefore a division among the multitude, because of
him;
44 but some of them wished to take him; no one, however, laid hands
on him.
45 The attendants therefore came to the chief priests and Pharisees;
and they said to them: Why did you not bring him?
46 The attendants answered: Never man so spoke, as this man
speaks.
47 The Pharisees answered them: Are you also deceived?
48 Has any one of the rulers believed on him, or of the Pharisees?
49 But the multitude, that knows not the law, are cursed.
50 Nicodemus, being one of them, says to them:180
Codex Sinaiticus:
51 Does our law condemn the man unless it first hear from him and
know what he does?
52 They answered and said to him: Art thou also of Galilee? Search
and see that out of Galilee a prophet arises not.
[John 7:53 – 8:11 is not found in the Sinaiticus. Anderson includes
instead two versions or these verses – the first from codex D and the
second a different account supposed by Griesbach to be a very
probable omission.
53 And they went each one to his own house.
John 7
8:1 But Jesus went into the mount of Olives.
2 And early in the morning he comes again into the temple, and all
the people came to him.
3 And the scribes and the Pharisees bring a woman taken in sin,
and having placed her in the midst.
4 the priests say to him, tempting him, that they may have an
accusation against him: Teacher, this woman has been taken in
adultery, in the very act.
5 Now, Moses in the law commanded us to stone such: but now
what sayest thou?
6 But Jesus stooped down and with his finger wrote on the ground.
7 But as they continued asking, he lifted himself up and said to
them: Let him that is without sin among you be the first to throw a
stone at her.
8 And he again stooped down and with his finger wrote on the
ground.
9 And each one of the Jews went out, beginning from the elder, so
that all went out; and he was left alone, and the woman being in the
midst. 10 And Jesus lifted himself up and said to the woman: Where
are they? Has no one condemned thee?
11 And she said to him: No one, sir. And he said: Neither do I
condemn thee; go, from this time sin no more.
8:1 But Jesus went into the mount of Olives.
2 And early in the morning he came again into the temple, and all
the people came to him, and he sat down and taught them.
3 And the scribes and the Pharisees bring to him a woman taken in
adultery, and having placed her in the midst
4 they say to him: Teacher, this woman was taken in adultery, in
the very act.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
181
5 Now, in the law Moses commanded that such should be stoned:
thou therefore, what sayest thou?
6 But this they said tempting him, that they might have to accuse
him.
But Jesus stooped down and with his finger wrote on the ground.
7 And as they continued asking him, he lifted himself up and said to
them: He that is without sin among you, let him be the first to throw
the stone at her.
8 And again he stooped down and wrote on the ground.
9 But they having heard, and being convicted by their conscience,
went out one by one, beginning from the elder to the last; and Jesus
was left alone, and the woman standing in the midst.
10 But Jesus lifted himself up, and seeing no one but the woman,
said to her: Woman, where are, those thy accusers? Has no one
condemned thee?
11 She said: No one, sir. And Jesus said to her: Neither do I
condemn thee: go and sin no more.]
12 Again therefore Jesus spoke to them, saying: I am the Light of the
world: he that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have
the light of life.
13 The Pharisees therefore said to him: Thou testifiest of thyself: thy
testimony is not true.
14 Jesus answered and said to them: Though I testify of myself, my
testimony is true, for I know whence I came and whither I go: you
know not whence I come or whither I go.
15 You judge according to the flesh; I judge no one.
16 And even if I judge, my judgment is true, because I am not alone,
but I and he that sent me.
17 And even in your law it is written that the testimony of two men is
true.
18 I am one testifying of myself, and the Father who sent me testifies
of me.
19 They said therefore to him: Where is thy Father? Jesus answered:
You know neither me nor my Father: if you had known me, you
would have known my Father also.
20 These words spoke he in the treasury while teaching in the
temple; and no one took him, because his hour had not yet come.
21 He therefore said again to them: I go away, and you shall seek me,
and in your sin you shall die: whither I go you cannot come.
22 The Jews then said: Will he kill himself, because he says: Whither
I go you cannot come?
23 And he said to them: You are from beneath, I am from above: you
are of this world, I am not of this world.182
Codex Sinaiticus:
24 Therefore said I to you that you shall die in your sins; for if you
believe not that I am he, you shall die in your sins.
25 They said therefore to him: Who art thou? Jesus said to them:
Altogether that which I also say to you.
26 I have many things to say and to judge of you; but he that sent me
is true, and what I have heard from him, these things I speak unto
the world.
27 They knew not that he spoke to them of the Father.
28 Then said Jesus: When you shall have, lifted up the Son of man,
then you shall know that I am he, and that I do nothing of myself, but
as the Father has taught me, I speak these things.
29 And he that sent me is with me: he has not left me alone, for I do
always the things that are pleasing to him.
30 While he was speaking these things many believed on him.
31 Jesus then said to the Jews that believed on him: If you abide in
my word, you are my disciples in truth,
32 and you shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.
33 They answered to him: We are Abraham’s posterity, and have
never been in bondage to any one; how sayest thou: You shall
become free?
34 Jesus answered them: Verily, verily, I say to you, that every one
that does sin is a servant of sin.
35 But the servant abides not in the house forever: the Son abides
forever.
36 If, then, the Son shall make you free, you shall be free indeed.
37 I know that you are Abraham’s posterity; but you seek to kill me,
because my word has no place in you.
38 I speak what things I have seen with my Father, and you then do
what things you have heard from your father.
39 They answered and said to him: Abraham is our father. Jesus says
to them: If you were the children of Abraham, you would do the
works of Abraham;
40 but now you seek to kill me, a man that has spoken to you the
truth, which I heard from God: this Abraham did not.
41 You do the works of your fathers. They said to him: We have not
been born of lewdness; we have one Father, God.
42 Jesus said to them: If God were your Father, you would love me;
for I came forth from God and have come hither: nor indeed have I
come of myself, but he sent me.
43 Why know you not my speech? because you cannot hear my word.
44 You are of your father, the devil, and the desires of your father you
will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and has not stood in
the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaks what is
false, he speaks of his own, for he is a liar and the father of it.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
183
45 But because I tell you the truth, you believe me not.
46 Which of you convinces me of sin? If I speak the truth, why do you
not believe me?
47 He that is of God hears the words of God; for this reason you hear
not, because you are not of God.
48 The Jews answered and said to him: Do we not well say that thou
art a Samaritan, and hast a demon?
49 Jesus answered: I have not a demon, but I honor my Father, and
you dishonor me.
50 But I seek not my glory: there is that seeks and judges.
51 Verily, verily, I say to you, if any one keep my word, he shall never
see death.
52 The Jews said to him: Now we know that thou hast a demon.
Abraham is dead, and the prophets; and thou sayest: If any one keep
my word, he shall never taste of death:
53 art thou greater than our father Abraham, who is dead? And the
prophets are dead: whom makest thou thyself?
54 Jesus answered: If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing; it is my
Father that glorifies me, of whom you say that he is your God;
55 and yet you have not known him, but I know him. If I should say
that I do not know him, I should be a liar like you; but I know him,
and his word I keep.
56 Abraham, your father, rejoiced that he could see my day, and he
saw it and was glad.
57 The Jews then said to him: Thou art not yet fifty years old, and
hast thou seen Abraham?
58 Jesus said to them: Verily, verily, I say to you, before Abraham
came into being, I am.
59 They therefore took up stones to throw at him; but Jesus hid
himself and went out of the temple.
John 9
1 And passing by he saw a man blind from his birth.
2 And his disciples asked him, saying: Rabbi, who sinned, this man
or his parents, that he was born blind?
3 Jesus answered: Neither this man sinned nor his parents, but that
the works of God might be manifested in him.
4 We must work the works of him that sent us while it is day: there
comes night, when no man can work.
5 While I am in the world, I am the Light of the world.
6 He said these things, and spat on the ground, and made clay of the
spittle, and anointed his eyes with the clay,184
Codex Sinaiticus:
7 and said to him: Go wash in the pool of Siloam, which is,
translated. Sent. He went therefore and washed, and came seeing.
8 The neighbors therefore, and those that had seen him before, that
he was a beggar, said: Is not this he that sat and begged?
9 Others said that this is he; others said: No, but he is like him. He
said: I am he.
10 They therefore said to him: How were thy eyes opened?
11 He answered: The man that is called Jesus made clay and anointed
my eyes, and said to me: Go to Siloam and wash. Having gone
therefore and washed, I received sight.
12 They said to him: Where is he? He says: I know not.
13 They bring to the Pharisees him that was formerly blind.
14 And it was a sabbath on the day in which Jesus made clay and
opened his eyes.
15 Again therefore the Pharisees also asked him how he had received
sight. He said to them: He put clay upon my eyes and I washed and
do see.
16 Some of the Pharisees therefore said: This man is not from God,
for he keeps not the sabbath. Others said: How can a man a sinner
do such signs? And there was a division among them.
17 They say therefore to the blind man again: What sayest thou of
him, because he has opened thy eyes? He said: He is a prophet.
18 The Jews therefore did not believe concerning him, that he was
blind and had received sight, till they had called the parents of him
that had received sight,
19 and asked them, saying: Is this your son, of whom you say that he
was born blind? How, then, does he now see?
20 His parents therefore answered and said: We know that this is our
son, and that he was born blind;
21 but how he now sees we know not, or who opened his eyes we
know not: ask him; he is of age: he shall speak for himself
22 These things said his parents because they feared the Jews; for the
Jews had already agreed that if any one should confess him to be
Christ, he should be put out of the synagogue.
23 For this reason his parents said that he is of age, ask him.
24 They therefore a second time called the man that had been blind,
and said to him: Give glory to God: we know that this man is a
sinner.
25 He then answered: If he is a sinner, I know not: one thing I know,
that, being blind, I now see.
26 They said therefore to him: What did he for thee? How opened he
thy eyes?
27 He answered them: I have told you already, and you did not hear:
why will you hear again? Will you also become his disciples?The H. T. Anderson New Testament
185
28 They reviled him and said: Thou art a disciple of that man, but we
are Moses’ disciples:
29 we know that God spoke to Moses, but this man, we know not
whence he is.
30 The man answered and said to them: Why, in this is that which is
wonderful, that you know not whence he is, and yet he has opened
my eyes.
31 We know that God hears not sinners, but if any one be a worshiper
of God and do his will, him he hears.
32 Never was it heard that any one opened the eyes of one that had
been born blind:
33 if this man were not of God, he could do nothing.
34 They answered and said to him: Thou wast altogether born in
sins, and dost thou teach us? And they cast him out.
35 Jesus heard that they had cast him out, and he found him and
said: Dost thou believe on the Son of man?
36 He answered and said: And who is he, Lord, that I may believe on
him?
37 Jesus said to him: Thou hast both seen him, and he it is that talks
with thee.
38 He said, Lord, I believe; and he worshiped him.
39 And Jesus said: For judgment have I come into this world, that
those that see not may see, and that those that see may become blind.
40 Some of the Pharisees that were with him heard, and said to him:
Are we also blind?
41 Jesus said to them: If you were blind, you would not have sin; but
now you say: We see: your sin remains.
John 10
1 Verily, verily, I say to you, he that enters not through the door into
the sheepfold, but goes up by some other way, he is a thief and a
robber:
2 but he that enters through the door is the shepherd of the sheep.
3 To him the porter opens, and the sheep hear his voice, and he calls
his own sheep by name and leads them out.
4 When he puts forth all of his own sheep, he goes before them, and
the sheep follow him, because they know his voice;
5 but a stranger they will not follow, but flee from him, because they
know not the voice of strangers.
6 This parable spoke Jesus to them; but they knew not what things
they were that he spoke to them.
7 Jesus therefore said: Verily, verily, I say to you: I am the door of the
sheep.186
Codex Sinaiticus:
8 All as many as have come are thieves and robbers, but the sheep
did not hear them.
9 I am the door: through me if any man enter in, he shall be saved,
and shall go in and out, and find pasture.
10 The thief comes not but that he may steal and kill and destroy: I
have come that they may have life, and have it abundantly.
11 I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for
the sheep:
12 he that is a hireling and not a shepherd, to whom the sheep do not
belong, sees the wolf coming and leaves the sheep and flees, and the
wolf seizes and scatters them,
13 because he is a hireling, and cares not for the sheep.
14 I am the good shepherd, and know mine, and mine know me,
15 as the Father knows me and I know the Father; and I lay down my
life for the sheep.
16 And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also must
I bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one fold, one
shepherd.
17 For this reason my Father loves me, because I lay down my life,
that I may take it again.
18 No one takes it from me, but I lay it down of myself. Authority
have I to lay it down, and authority have I to take it again: this
commandment I received from my Father.
19 There arose again a division among the Jews because of these
words.
20 Therefore many of them said: He has a demon and is mad; why
hear him?
21 Others said: These words are not of one that has a demon: can a
demon open the eyes of the blind?
22 But the feast of dedication was held in Jerusalem; it was winter;
23 and Jesus was walking in the temple, in Solomon’s porch.
24 The Jews therefore came around him and said to him: How long
dost thou keep us in suspense? If thou art the Christ, tell us plainly.
25 Jesus answered: I have told you, and you do not believe: the works
13 that I do in my Father’s name, these testify of me;
26 but you believe not, because you are not of my sheep.
27 My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me,
28 and I give them eternal life, and they shall never perish, and no
one shall snatch them out of my hand.
29 What the Father has given to me is greater than all, and no one
can snatch them out of the Father’s hand.
30 I and the Father are one.
31 Again the Jews took up stones to stone him.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
187
32 Jesus answered them: Many good works have I shown you from
the Father; for what one of these do you stone me?
33 The Jews answered him: For a good work we stone thee not, but
for blasphemy, and because thou, being man, makest thyself God.
34 Jesus answered them: Is it not written in your law, I said: You are
gods?
35 If he called them gods, to whom the word of God came, and the
Scripture cannot be broken:
36 of him whom the Father sanctified and sent into the world, say
you: Thou blasphemest; because I said: I am the Son of God?
37 If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not;
38 but if I do, although you believe not me, believe the works, that
you may know and acknowledge that the Father is in me and I in the
Father.
39 They then sought to take him, and he went forth from their hand.
40 And he went away again beyond the Jordan into the place where
John was first baptizing, and abode there.
41 And many came to him and said: John indeed did no sign, but all
things whatever John said of this man were true.
42 And many believed on him there.
John 11
l But a man was sick, Lazarus of Bethany, of the village of Mary and
her sister Martha.
2 And it was Mary that anointed the Lord with ointment, and wiped
his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick.
3 The sisters therefore sent to him, saying: Lord, behold, he whom
thou lovest is sick.
4 But Jesus hearing it, said: This sickness is not to death, but for the
glory of God, that the Son of God may be glorified through it.
5 Now, Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus.
6 When therefore he had heard that he was sick, then indeed he
abode two days in the place where he was:
7 then after this he says to the disciples: Let us go into Judea again.
8 The disciples say to him: Rabbi, the Jews just now sought to stone
thee, and goest thou thither again?
9 Jesus answered: Are there not twelve hours of the day? If any one
walk in the day, he stumbles not, because he sees the light of the
world:
10 if any one walk in the night, he stumbles, because the light is not
in him.
11 These things said he, and after this he says to them: Our friend
Lazarus has fallen asleep; but I go that I may awake him.188
Codex Sinaiticus:
12 Then the disciples said to him: Lord, if he has fallen asleep, he
shall be saved.
13 Jesus, however, had spoken of his death; but they supposed that
he spoke of the rest of sleep.
14 Therefore Jesus then said to them plainly: Lazarus is dead;
15 and I rejoice for your sakes, in order that you may believe, that I
was not there; but let us go to him.
16 Thomas, who is called Didymus, then said to his fellow-disciples:
Let I us also go, that we may die with him.
17 Jesus came therefore and found that he had been four days in the
tomb.
18 But Bethany was near Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs off.
19 And many of the Jews had come to Martha and Mary and their
friends, to comfort them concerning their brother.
20 Martha therefore, when she heard that Jesus was coming, met
him; but Mary sat in the house.
21 Martha therefore said to Jesus: Lord, if thou hadst been here, my
brother would not have died.
22 And now I know that whatever things thou shalt ask of God, God
will give thee.
23 Jesus says to her: Thy brother shall rise.
24 Martha says to him: I know that he will rise in the resurrection, in
the last day.
25 Jesus said to her: I am the resurrection and the life; he that
believes on me, though he were dead, he shall live,
26 and whoever lives and believes on me shall never die: believest
thou this?
27 She says to him: Yes, Lord: I have believed that thou art the
Christ, the Son of God, he that comes into the world.
28 And after saying this she went away and called Mary her sister
secretly, saying: The Teacher is present, and calls for thee.
29 When she heard, she rose quickly and came to him;
30 but Jesus had not yet come into the village, but was in the place
where Martha had met him.
31 Therefore the Jews that were with her in the house, and were
comforting her, seeing Mary, that she rose up quickly and went out,
followed her, supposing that she was going to the tomb, that she
might weep there.
32 Mary therefore, when she came where Jesus was, seeing him, fell
at his feet, saying to him: Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother
would not have died.
33 Jesus therefore, when he saw her weeping and the Jews that came
with her weeping, was greatly moved in spirit, and was troubled,The H. T. Anderson New Testament
189
34 and said: Where have you laid him? They say to him: Lord, come
and see.
35 Jesus wept.
36 Therefore said the Jews: See how he loved him.
37 But some of them said: Could not this man, that opened the eyes
of the blind man, have caused that even this man should not die?
38 Jesus therefore, again greatly moved within himself, comes to the
tomb; but it was a cave, and a stone lay upon it.
39 Jesus says: Take away the stone. Martha, the sister of him that
had died, says to him: Lord, the smell is now offensive; for he has
been dead four days.
40 Jesus says to her: Did I not tell thee that if thou wouldst believe
thou shouldst see the glory of God?
41 They therefore took away the stone; but Jesus lifted up his eyes
and said: Father, I thank thee that thou hast heard me.
42 But I knew that thou always hearest me; but yet, on account of the
multitude that stands around, I said it, that they may believe that
thou didst send me.
43 And having said these things, he cried with a loud voice: Lazarus,
come forth.
44 And he that had been dead came forth, bound hands and feet with
swathing bands; and his face was bound around with a handkerchief.
Jesus says to them: Loose him, and let him go.
45 Many therefore of the Jews, that had come to Mary and had seen
what he did, believed on him;
46 but some of them went away to the Pharisees and told them what
Jesus had done.
47 Therefore the chief priests and the Pharisees brought together the
Sanhedrim, and said: What do we, for this man does many signs?
48 If we let him alone thus, all will believe on him; and the Romans
will come and take away both our place and nation.
49 But a certain one of them, Caiaphas, being chief priest that year,
said to them: You know nothing,
50 neither do you consider that it is profitable for us that one man
die for the people and not that the whole nation perish.
51 But this he spoke not of himself, but, being chief priest that year,
he prophesied that Jesus was about to die for the nation;
52 and not for the nation only, but that he might gather into one the
children of God also, that were scattered abroad.
53 From that day therefore they took counsel to kill him.
54 Jesus then no longer walked openly among the Jews; but went
away thence into the country near the wilderness, to a city called
Ephraim; and there he abode with his disciples.190
Codex Sinaiticus:
55 But the passover of the Jews was near, and many went up from
the country to Jerusalem before the passover, that they might purify
themselves.
56 They therefore sought Jesus and said among themselves while
standing in the temple: What think you, that he will not come to the
feast?
57 But the chief priests and the Pharisees had given commandments
that, if any knew where he was, he should make it known, in order
that they might take him.
John 12
1 Jesus therefore, six days before the passover, came to Bethany,
where Lazarus was, whom Jesus raised from the dead.
2 They therefore made him a supper there, and Martha served, but
Lazarus was one of those that reclined at table with him.
3 Then Mary took a pound of the ointment of pure nard, very costly,
and anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair; and
the house was filled with the perfume of the ointment.
4 But Judas Iscariot, one of his disciples, he that was about to deliver
him up, says:
5 Why was this ointment not sold for three hundred denarii, and
given to the poor?
6 But this he said, not because he cared for the poor, but because he
was a thief, and having the bag he carried what was thrown in.
7 Jesus therefore said: Let her alone; she bought it that she might
keep it to the day of my burial.
8 For the poor you have always with you, but me you have not
always.
9 The great multitude of the Jews therefore knew that he was there,
and came not because of Jesus only, but that they might see Lazarus
also, whom he raised from the dead.
10 But the chief priests had determined that they would kill Lazarus
also,
11 because many of the Jews, on account of him, went away and
believed on Jesus.
12 On the next day a great multitude that had come to the feast,
hearing that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem.
13 took branches of palm-trees and went forth to meet him, and
cried: Hosanna, blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord,
and blessed is the King of Israel.
14 But Jesus, finding a young ass, sat upon it, as it is written:
15 Fear not, daughter of Zion: behold, thy King comes sitting upon
the foal of an ass.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
191
16 These things his disciples knew not at first, but when Jesus had
been glorified, then they remembered that these things were written
of him, and that they had done these things for him.
17 The multitude that was with him therefore testified that he had
called Lazarus from the tomb, and raised him from the dead.
18 For this reason also the multitude met him, because they heard
that he had done this sign.
19 The Pharisees therefore said among themselves: You see that you
profit nothing: behold, the world has gone after him.
20 But of those that went up to worship at the feast, there were some
Greeks:
21 these therefore came to Philip, who was of Bethsaida of Galilee,
and asked him, saying: Sir, we wish to see Jesus.
22 Philip comes and tells Andrew: Andrew and Philip come and tell
Jesus.
23 But Jesus answered them, saying: The hour has come that the Son
of man should be glorified.
24 Verily, verily, I say to you, unless a grain of wheat fall into the
ground and die, itself abides alone; but if it die, it brings forth much
fruit.
25 He that loves his life shall lose it, and he that hates his life in this
world shall keep it to life eternal.
26 If any one serve me, let him follow me, and where I am, there
shall my servant also be: if any one serve me him will my Father
honor.
27 Now is my soul troubled, and what; shall I say? Father, save me
from this hour. But for this cause came I to this hour.
28 Father, glorify thy name. There came therefore a voice from
heaven: I have glorified it, and will glorify it again.
29 Therefore the multitude that stood by, hearing it, said that it
thundered: others said: An angel has spoken to him.
30 Jesus answered and said: Not for my sake came this voice, but for
yours.
31 Now is the judgment of this world: now shall the prince of this
world be cast out,
32 and I, when I shall have been lifted up from the earth, will draw
all men to myself.
33 But this he said, signifying by what kind of death he was about to
die.
34 Then the multitude answered him: We have heard out of the law
that the Christ abides forever, and how sayest thou that the Son of
man must be lifted up? Who is this, the Son of man?192
Codex Sinaiticus:
35 Jesus therefore said to them: Yet a little while the light is among
you. Walk while you have the light, that darkness overtake you not;
and he that walks in darkness knows not whither he goes.
36 While you have the light, believe on the light, that you may
become sons of light. These things spoke Jesus and went away and
hid himself from them.
37 But though he had done so many signs before them, they believed
not on him.
38 that the word of Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled, which he
spoke: Lord, who of us has believed what is heard? and to whom has
the arm of the Lord been revealed?
39 For this reason they could not believe, because Isaiah said again:
40 He has blinded their eyes and hardened their hearts, lest they
should see with their eyes, and understand with their heart, and
should turn and I should give them health.
41 These things said Isaiah, because he saw his glory, and spoke of
him.
42 Yet however, of the rulers, many believed on him, but because of
the Pharisees they did not confess, lest they should be put out of the
synagogue;
43 for they loved the glory of men more than the glory of God.
44 But Jesus cried and said: He that believes on me believes not on
me, but on him that sent me.
45 and he that sees me sees him that sent me.
46 I have come a light into the world, that whoever believes on me
may not abide in darkness.
47 And if any one hear my words and keep them not, I judge him not;
for I came not to judge the world, but to save the world.
48 He that rejects me and receives not my words, has that which
judges him: the word that I have spoken, that shall judge him in the
last day.
49 For I have not spoken of myself, but the Father who sent me, he
himself has given me commandment what I should say and what I
should speak.
50 And I know that his commandment is life eternal. What things
therefore I speak, as the Father said to me, so I speak.
John 13
1 But before the feast of passover, Jesus, knowing that his hour had
come that he should go out of this world to the Father, having loved
his own that were in the world, he loved them to the end.
2 And when supper had ended, as the devil had already put into the
heart of Judas Iscariot, son of Simon, to betray him.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
193
3 Jesus, knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands,
and that he had come forth from God and was going to God,
4 rises from supper and lays aside his garments; and having taken a
towel, he girded himself:
5 then he poured water into the basin, and began to wash the feet of
the disciples, and to wipe them with the towel with which he was
girded.
6 He then comes to Simon Peter; he says to him: Lord, dost thou
wash my feet?
7 Jesus answered and said to him: What I am doing thou knowest not
now, but thou shalt know after this.
8 Peter says to him: Thou shalt never wash my feet. Jesus answered
him: Unless I wash thee, thou hast no part with me.
9 Simon Peter says to him: Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands
and my head.
10 Jesus says to him: He that has bathed has no need to wash his
hands and head, but is wholly clean; and you are clean, but not all.
11 For he knew him that would deliver him up; for this reason he
said: Not all of you are clean.
12 When therefore he had washed their feet and had taken his
garments, and reclined again at table, he said to them: Do you know
what I have done for you?
13 You call me: Teacher and Lord, and you say well, for I am.
14 If, then, I, the Lord and the Teacher, have washed your feet, you
also ought to wash the feet of one another;
15 for I have given you an example, that you also should do as I have
done to you.
16 Verily, verily, I say to you, a servant is not greater than his lord,
nor is an apostle greater than he that sent him.
17 If you know these things, blessed are you if you do them.
18 I speak not of you all; I know whom I have chosen; but that the
scripture might be fulfilled: He that eats bread with me has lifted up
his heel against me.
19 Even now I tell you before it comes to pass, that when it shall have
come to pass you may believe that I am he.
20 Verily, verily, I say to you, he that receives whom I shall send
receives me, and he that receives me receives him that sent me.
21 After saying these things, Jesus was troubled in spirit, and
testified and said: Verily, verily, I say to you, that one of you shall
deliver me up.
22 The disciples looked one at another, doubting concerning whom
he spoke.
23 One of his disciples, whom Jesus loved, was reclining in the
bosom of Jesus:194
Codex Sinaiticus:
24 Simon Peter then nods to this one and says to him: Tell who it is
of whom he speaks.
25 Therefore he, leaning back thus on the breast of Jesus, says to
him: Lord, who is it?
26 Jesus answers: He it is for whom I shall dip the morsel and give it
to him. Therefore, having dipped the morsel, he takes it and gives it
to Judas, son of Simon Iscariot.
27 And after the morsel, then Satan entered into him. Jesus therefore
says to him: What thou doest, do quickly.
28 But no one of those reclining at table knew for what purpose he
said this to him;
29 for some supposed, because Judas had the bag, that Jesus said to
him: Buy the things of which we have need for the feast, or that he
should give something to the poor.
30 Having therefore received the morsel, he went out Immediately;
and it was night.
31 When therefore he had gone out, Jesus said: Now is the Son of
man glorified, and God is glorified in him.
32 If God is glorified in him. God also will glorify him in himself, and
he will immediately glorify him.
33 Little children, yet a little while am I with you: you shall seek me,
and as I said to the Jews, that where I am you cannot come, to you
also I say it now.
34 A new commandment I give to you, that you love one another; as I
have loved you, that you also love one another.
35 In this shall all men know that you are my disciples, if you have
love one for another.
36 Simon Peter says to him: Lord. whither goest thou? Jesus
answered: Whither I go, thou canst not follow me now, but thou shalt
follow me hereafter.
37 Peter says to him: Lord, why can I not follow thee now? I will lay
down my life for thee.
38 Jesus answered: Wilt thou lay down thy life for me? Verily, verily,
I say to thee, a cock shall not crow till thou hast denied me three
times.
John 14
1 Let not your hearts be troubled: believe on God, believe also on me.
2 In my Father’s house are many mansions; if not so, I would have
told you; for I am going to prepare a place for you.
3 And when I shall have gone and prepared a place for you, I will
come again, and take you to myself, that where I am you also may be.
4 And whither I go you know the way.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
195
5 Thomas says to him: Lord, we know not whither thou goest, and
how know we the way?
6 Jesus says to him: I am he way, and the truth, and the life: no one
comes to the Father but through me. 7 If you have known me, you
shall know my Father also; and even now you know him and lave
seen him.
8 Philip says to him: Lord, show us the Father, and it is enough for
us.
9 Jesus says to him: So long a time am I with you, and hast thou not
known me, Philip? He that has seen me has seen the Father: how
sayest thou: show us the Father?
10 Believest thou not that I am in the Father and the Father is in me?
The words that I say to you I speak not of myself: the Father, who
abides in me, does the works.
11 Believe me that I am in the Father and the Father in me: if not,
believe because of the works themselves.
12 Verily, verily, I say to you, he that believes on me, the works that I
do he also shall do, and greater works than these shall he do because
I go to the Father.
13 And whatever you shall ask in my name, this will I do, that the
Father may be glorified in the Son.
14 If you ask any thing in my name. I will do it.
15 If you love me, you will keep my commandments.
16 And I will entreat the Father, and anther Advocate will he give
you, that he may be with you for ever,
17 the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it
sees* him not, neither knows him: you know him, because he abides
with you and shall be in you.
* Discerns or acknowledges him not
18 I will not leave you orphans; I am coming to you.
19 Yet a little while and the world sees me no more; but you shall see
me; because I live and you shall live.
20 In that day you shall know that I am in my Father and you in me
and I in you.
21 He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves
me; and he that loves me shall be loved by my Father, and I will love
him and will manifest myself to him.
22 Judas, not Iscariot, says to him: Lord, and how is it that thou will
manifest thyself to us, and not to the world?
23 Jesus answered and said to him: If any one love me, he will keep
my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and
make our abode with him.
24 He that loves me not keeps not my words; and the word that you
hear is not mine, but the Father’s that sent me.196
Codex Sinaiticus:
25 These things have I spoken to you while abiding with you;
26 but the Advocate, the Holy Spirit whom the Father will send in my
name, he shall teach you all things, and shall bring to your
remembrance all things that I have said to you.
27 Peace I leave you, my peace I give you: not as the world gives, give
I to you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid.
28 You heard that I said to you: I go away and come to you. If you
loved me, you would rejoice because I go to the Father, for the Father
is greater than I.
29 And now I have told you before it comes to pass, that when it
comes to pass you may believe.
30 No longer will I talk much with you; for the prince of the world
comes, and has nothing in me,
31 but that the world may know that I love the Father, and as the
Father gave me commandment, so I do. Arise, let us go hence.
John 15
1 I am the true vine, and my Father is the vinedresser.
2 Every branch in me that bears not fruit he takes away, and every
one that bears fruit, he cleanses, that it may bear more fruit.
3 You are now clean, because of the word that I have spoken to you:
4 abide in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself,
unless it abide in the vine, so neither can you, unless you abide in me.
5 I am the vine, you the branches. He that abides in me and I in him,
he bears much fruit; for without me you can do nothing.
6 If any one abide not in me, he is cast out as the branch and withers,
and they gather it and throw it into the fire, and it is burned.
7 If you abide in me and my words abide in you, ask whatever you
will, and it shall be done for you.
8 In this is my Father glorified, that you bear much fruit and become
my disciples.
9 As the Father has loved me, I also have loved you: abide in my love.
10 If you keep my commandments, you shall abide in my love, as I
have kept my Father’s commandments and abide in his love.
11 These things I have spoken to you that my joy may be in you and
your joy may be fulfilled.
12 My commandment is this, that you love one another as I have
loved you.
13 Greater love has no one than this, that he lay down his life for his
friends.
14 You are my friends, if you do what things I command you.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
197
15 I no longer call you servants, because the servant knows not what
his lord does; but I have called you friends, because An all things that
I have heard from my Father I have made known to you.
16 You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and appointed
you that you may go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should
remain, that whatever you ask the Father in my name he may give
you.
17 These things I command you, that you love one another.
18 If the world hates you, you know that it has hated me first.
19 If you were of the world, the world would love its own; but because
you are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore the world hates you.
20 Remember the word that I spoke to you: The servant is not
greater than his lord. If they have persecuted me, they will persecute
you also: if they have kept my word, they will keep yours also.
21 But all these things will they do to you on account of my name,
because they know not him that sent me.
22 If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not have had
sin; but now they have no excuse for their sin.
23 He that hates me hates my Father also.
24 If I had not done among them the works that no other did, they
would have had no sin; but now they have both seen and hated both
me and my Father.
25 But that the word might be fulfilled which is written in their law:
They hated me without a cause.
26 When the Advocate has come, whom I will send you from the
Father, the Spirit of truth that proceeds from the Father, he shall
testify of me;
27 and you also shall testify, because you have been with me from the
beginning.
John 16
1 These things have I spoken to you that you may not be offended.
2 They will put you out of the synagogues: indeed, the hour comes
that every one that kills you will think that he offers service to God.
3 And these things will they do because they have not known the
Father nor me.
4 But these things I have spoken to you that when the hour comes
you may remember them, that I told you. And these things I told you
not from the beginning, because I was with you.
5 But now I go to him that sent me, and no one of you asks me:
Whither goest thou?
6 And yet, because I have told you these things, sorrow has filled
your heart.198
Codex Sinaiticus:
7 But I tell you the truth, it is profitable for you that I go away. For if I
go not away, the Advocate will not come to you; but if I go, I will send
him to you.
8 And when he comes, he will convince the world of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgment.
9 Of sin indeed, because they believe not on me;
10 but of righteousness, because I go to the Father and you see me no
more;
11 but of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged.
12 I have yet many things to say to you, but you cannot bear them
now;
13 but when he has come, the Spirit of truth, he shall guide you in all
the truth; for he shall not speak of himself, but whatever he hears he
shall speak, and he shall announce to you things to come.
14 He shall glorify me, for he shall take of mine and announce it to
you.
15 All things whatever the Father has are mine: therefore I said that
he takes of mine and announces to you.
16 A little while, and you see me no more, and again a little while,
and you shall see me.
17 Some of his disciples therefore said one to another: What is this
that he says to us: A little while, and you see me not, and again a little
while, and you shall see me? and that 1 go to the Father?
18 They said therefore: This, what is it that he says, The little while?
We know not what he says.
19 Jesus knew that they desired to ask him, and he said to them:
Concerning this do you inquire among yourselves because I said: A
little while, and you see me not, and again a little while, and you shall
see me?
20 Verily, verily, I say to you, that you shall weep and lament, but the
world shall rejoice: you shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall
become joy.
21 The wife, when she is in labor, has sorrow, because her hour has
come; but when she has brought forth the child, she no longer
remembers the affliction for joy that a man has been born into the
world.
22 And you therefore now indeed have sorrow; but I shall see you
again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no one takes from
you.
23 And in that day, of me you shall ask nothing. Verily, verily, I say to
you, if you ask anything of the Father, he will give it to you in my
name.
24 Till now you have asked nothing in my name: ask, and you shall
receive, that your joy may be fulfilled.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
199
25 These things I have spoken to you in parables: the hour comes
when I will no longer speak to you in parables, but will tell you
plainly concerning the Father.
26 In that day you shall ask in my name, and 1 say not to you that I
will beseech the Father for you;
27 for the Father himself loves you, because you have loved me, and
have believed that I came forth from God.
28 I came forth from the Father, and have come into the world: again
I leave the world and go to the Father.
29 His disciples say: Behold, now thou speakest plainly, and utterest
no parable.
30 Now we know that thou knowest all things, and hast no need that
any one should ask thee: in this we believe that thou earnest forth
from God.
31 Jesus answered them: Do you now believe?
32 Behold, the hour comes, and has come, that you shall be scattered
each one to his own and leave me alone; and yet I am not alone, for
the Father is with me.
33 These things I have spoken to you that in me you may have peace.
In the world you have affliction; but take courage, I have overcome
the world.
John 17
1 These things spoke Jesus; and, lifting his eyes to heaven, he said:
Father, the hour has come: glorify thy Son, that the Son may glorify
thee,
2 as thou hast given him authority over all flesh, that to all that thou
hast given him he may give them life eternal.
3 But eternal life is this, that they may know thee, the only true God,
and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.
4 I have glorified thee on the earth, having finished the work that
thou gavest me to do;
5 and now, Father, glorify thou me with thyself with the glory that I
had with thee before the world was.
6 I have manifested thy name to the men whom thou gavest me out
of the world. Thine they were, and thou gavest them to me, and they
have kept thy word;
7 now they know that all things whatever thou hast given me are
from thee;
8 for the words that thou gavest me I have given them, and they have
received them, and have known in truth that I came forth from thee,
and have believed that thou didst send me.
9 I pray for them; I pray not for the world, but for those that thou
hast given me, for they are thine,200
Codex Sinaiticus:
10 and all mine are thine, and thine are mine, and I have been
glorified in them.
11 And I am no longer in the world, and these are in the world, and I
come to thee. Holy Father, keep them in my name that thou hast
given me, that they may be one, as we.
12 When I was with them I kept them in thy name that thou hast
given me, and I have guarded them, and no one of them is lost but
the son of perdition, that the Scripture may be fulfilled.
13 But now I come to thee, and these things I speak in the world, that
they may have my joy fulfilled in themselves.
14 I have given them thy word, and the world has hated them,
because they are not of the world as I am not of the world.
15 I pray not that thou take them out of the world, but that thou keep
them from the evil one.
16 They are not of the world, as I am not of the world.
17 Sanctify them in the truth: thy word is truth.
18 As thou didst send me into the world, I sent them into the world;
19 and for them I sanctify myself, that they also may be sanctified in
the truth.
20 But not for these only do I pray, but also for those that believe on
me through their word,
21 that they all may be one, as thou. Father, art in me and I in thee,
that they also may be in us, that the world may believe that thou
didst send me.
22 And the glory that thou hast given me I have given them, that they
may be one as we are one:
23 I in them and thou in me, that they may be perfected into one,
that the world may know that thou hast sent me and hast loved them
as thou hast loved me.
24 Father, as to what thou hast given me, I would that they also be
with me where I am, that they may see my glory, which thou hast
given me because thou lovedst me before the foundation of the
world.
25 Righteous Father, though the world has not known thee, yet I
have known thee, and these have known that thou didst send me;
26 and I have made known to them thy name, and will make it
known, that the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them
and I in them.
John 18
1 Having said these things, Jesus went forth with his disciples beyond
the brook of Cedar, where was a garden, into which he entered,
himself and his disciples.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
201
2 But Judas, also, who delivered him up, knew the place, because
Jesus had often gone thither in company with his disciples.
3 Judas therefore, having received the band, the attendants from the
chief priests and from the Pharisees, comes thither with torches and
lamps and weapons.
4 Jesus therefore, knowing all things that were coming upon him,
went forth and said to them: Whom seek you?
5 They answered him: Jesus the Nazarene. Jesus says to them: I am
he. But Judas also, who delivered him up, stood with them.
6 When therefore he said to them: I am he, they went back and fell
on the ground.
7 Again therefore he asked them: Whom seek you? And they said:
Jesus the Nazarene.
8 Jesus answered: I told you that I am he: if then ye seek me, let
these go away.
9 That the word might be fulfilled which he spoke: Of those that thou
hast given me I have lost none.
10 Simon Peter therefore, having a sword, drew it and struck the
servant of the chief priest, and cut off his right ear; and the name of
the servant was Malchus.
11 Jesus then said to Peter: Put the sword into the sheath. The cup
that the Father has given me, shall I not drink it?
12 Therefore the band and the officer and the attendants of the Jews
took Jesus and bound him,
13 and led him to Annas first; for he was father-in-law of Caiaphas
who was chief priest that year.
14 and it was Caiaphas that advised the Jews that it was profitable
that one man should die for the people.
15 But there followed Jesus, Simon Peter and another disciple. And
that disciple was acquainted with the chief priest, and went with
Jesus into the court of the chief priest,
16 but Peter stood at the gate without. Then the other disciple, the
acquaintance of the chief priest, went in and spoke to the doorkeeper,
and brought Peter in.
17 Then the maidservant that kept the door says to Peter: Art not
thou also of the disciples of this man? He says: I am not.
18 But the servants and the attendants, having made a fire of coals,
for it was cold, were standing and warming them selves; and Peter
also was standing with them and warming himself.
19 Then the chief priest asked Jesus concerning his disciples and
concerning his teaching.
20 Jesus answered him: I have spoken plainly to the world: I have
always taught in a synagogue and in the temple, where all the Jews
come together, and in secret have I spoken nothing.202
Codex Sinaiticus:
21 Why dost thou ask me? Ask those that have heard what I spoke to
them: behold, these know what I said.
22 But when he had spoken this, one of the attendants that stood by
struck Jesus with his open hand, saying: Answerest thou the chief
priest thus?
23 Jesus answered him: If I have spoken evil, testify of the evil; but if
well, why smitest thou me?
24 Annas then sent him, bound, to Caiaphas the chief priest.
25 But Simon Peter was standing and warming himself. They then
said to him: Art not thou also of his disciples? He denied and said: I
am not.
26 One of the servants of the chief priest, being a relative of him
whose ear Peter had cut off, says: Did I not see thee in the garden
with him?
27 Again therefore Peter denied; and immediately a cock crew.
28 Then they lead Jesus from Caiaphas to the pretorium; and it was
early morn. And they went not into the pretorium, that they might
not be defiled, but that they might eat the passover.
29 Pilate therefore came forth to them and said: What accusation
bring you against this man?
30 They answered and said to him: If this man had not done evil, we
would not have delivered him to thee.
31 Pilate therefore said to them: Take you him and judge him
according to your law. The Jews then said to him: It is not lawful for
us to put any one to death:
32 that the word of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spoke
signifying by what kind of death he was about to die.
33 Then Pilate entered the pretorium again, and called Jesus and
said to him: Art thou the King of the Jews?
34 Jesus answered: Sayest thou this of thyself, or did others tell thee
of me?
35 Pilate answered: Am I a Jew? Thy nation and the chief priests
delivered thee to me: what hast thou done?
36 Jesus answered: My kingdom is not of this world. If my kingdom
were of this world my servants would fight, that might not be
delivered to the Jews; but now my kingdom is not hence,
37 Pilate then said to him: Art thou not then a king? Jesus answered:
Thou sayest, for I am a king. To this end was I born, and to this end
have I come into the world, that I might testify to the truth: every one
that is of the truth hears my voice.
38 Pilate says to him: What is truth? And having said this. he went
out again to the Jews, and said to them: I find no fault in him.
39 But you have a custom that I release to you one at the passover:
will you therefore that I release to you the King of the Jews?The H. T. Anderson New Testament
203
40 They then cried out again, saying: Not this man, but Barabbas.
But Barabbas was a robber.
John 19
1 Pilate therefore then took Jesus and scourged him.
2 And the soldiers plaited a crown of thorns and put it on his head,
and threw a purple garment around him,
3 and came to him and said: Hail, King of the Jews; and they struck
him with the open hand.
4 Pilate again came forth and said to them, Behold, I bring him forth
to you, that you may know that I find no fault.
5 Jesus therefore came forth wearing the crown of thorns and purple
garment. And he says to them: Behold the man.
6 Therefore when the chief priests and the attendants saw him, they
cried out: Crucify, crucify. Pilate says to them: Take you him and
crucify him; for I find no fault in him.
7 The Jews answered: We have a law, and according to the law he
ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God.
8 Thereupon when Pilate heard this word, he was the more afraid,
9 and went into the pretorium again, and said to Jesus: Whence art
thou? But Jesus gave him no answer.
10 Pilate says to him: Speakest thou not to me? Knowest thou not
that I have authority to release thee and authority to crucify thee?
11 Jesus answered: Thou couldst have had no authority against me,
unless it had been given thee from above: therefore he that delivered
me to thee has the greater sin.
12 After this Pilate sought to release him; but the Jews cried out,
saying: If thou release this man, thou art not a friend of Caesar: every
one that makes himself king speaks against Caesar.
13 Then Pilate, after hearing these words, brought Jesus forth, and
sat on the judgment-seat in a place called The Pavement, but in
Hebrew, Gabbatha.
14 And it was the preparation of the passover: it was about the sixth
hour. And he says to the Jews: Behold your king.
15 They therefore cried out: Away with him, away with him, crucify
him. Pilate says to them: Shall I crucify your king? The chief priests
answered: We have no king but Caesar.
16 Then therefore he delivered him to them to be crucified. They
therefore took Jesus;
17 and bearing the cross for himself, he went forth to a place called
the place of a skull, which is called in Hebrew Golgotha,
18 where they crucified him, and with him two others, on this side
and on that, but Jesus in the midst.204
Codex Sinaiticus:
19 But Pilate wrote a title and put it on the cross; and it was written:
JESUS THE NAZARENE, THE KING OF THE JEWS.
20 Many of the Jews therefore read this title, because the place
where Jesus was crucified was near the city; and it was written in
Hebrew, in Latin, in Greek.
21 The chief priests of the Jews then said to, Pilate: Write not: The
king of the Jews, but that he said: I am the king of the Jews.
22 Pilate answered: What I have written, I have written.
23 The soldiers therefore, when they had crucified Jesus, took his
garments, and made four parts, for each soldier a part, and his coat.
But the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout.
24 They said therefore one to another: Let us not rend it, but cast lots
for it, whose it shall be. That the scripture might be fulfilled: They
divided my garments among them, and on my raiment they cast lots.
These things therefore the soldiers did.
25 But there stood by the cross of Jesus his mother and his mother’s
sister, Mary the wife of Cleopas, and Mary Magdalene.
26 Jesus therefore seeing his mother, and the disciple whom he loved
standing by, says to his mother: Woman, behold thy son.
27 Then he says to the disciple: Behold thy mother. And from that
hour the disciple took her to his own home.
28 After this, Jesus, knowing that all things had been already
finished, that the scripture might be fulfilled, says: I thirst.
29 There lay a vessel full of vinegar: having therefore put a sponge
full of vinegar on hyssop, they put it to his mouth.
30 When therefore he had received the vinegar, he said: It is
finished; and having bowed his head, he gave up the spirit.
31 The Jews therefore, because it was the preparation, that the bodies
might not remain on the cross during the sabbath, for that sabbath
was a great day, besought Pilate that their legs might be broken, and
that they might be taken away.
32 Then came the soldiers and broke the legs of the first, and of the
other that was crucified with him;
33 but coming to Jesus, when they saw him already dead, they broke
not his legs;
34 but one of the soldiers with a spear pierced his side, and
immediately there came forth blood and water.
35 And he that saw it has testified, and his testimony is true, and he
knows that he speaks what is true, that you also may believe.
36 For these things took place that the scripture might be fulfilled: A
bone of him shall not be broken.
37 And again another scripture says: They shall look on him whom
they pierced.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
205
38 But after these things Joseph, who was of Arimathea, being a
disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews, besought Pilate
that he might take away the body of Jesus; and Pilate gave
permission. They came therefore and took him away.
39 But Nicodemus also came, he that had come to him by night at the
first, bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about a hundred
pounds.
40 They therefore took the body of Jesus, and bound it in linen cloths
with the spices, as is the custom of the Jews to prepare for burial.
41 But there was, in the place where he had been crucified, a garden,
and in the garden a new sepulcher, in which no one had ever yet been
laid.
42 There then because of the preparation of the Jews, for the
sepulcher was near, laid they Jesus.
John 20
1 But on the first of the week, Mary Magdalene comes to the
sepulcher early, it being yet dark, and sees the stone taken away from
the sepulcher.
2 She therefore runs and comes to Simon Peter, and to the other
disciple whom Jesus loved, and says to them: They have taken away
the Lord out of the sepulcher, and we know not where they have laid
him.
3 Thereupon Peter went forth and the other disciple, and came to the
sepulcher.
4 But the two ran together; and the other disciple outran Peter, and
came first to the sepulcher;
5 and having stooped down, he saw the linen cloths lying: however he
went not in.
6 Then comes Simon Peter following him; and he went into the
sepulcher, and saw the linen cloths lying,
7 and the handkerchief, which was on his head, not lying with the
linen cloths, but folded up in a place by itself.
8 Therefore, the other disciple also that came first to the sepulcher
then went in, and saw and believed;
9 for they not yet knew the scripture, that he must rise from the dead.
10 The disciples then went away again to their homes.
11 But Mary stood without at the sepulcher weeping. Then as she
wept, she stooped down and looked into the sepulcher,
12 and saw two angels in white, sitting, one at the head and one at
the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain.
13 They say to her: Woman, why weepest thou? She says to them:
They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid206
Codex Sinaiticus:
him. Having said these things, she turned back, and saw Jesus
standing, and knew not that it was Jesus.
15 Jesus says to her: Woman, why weepest thou? Whom seekest
thou? She, supposing that he was the gardener, says to him: Sir, if
thou hast borne him away, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I
will take him away.
16 Jesus said to her: Mary. She turned and said to him in Hebrew:
Rabboni, which is called, Teacher.
17 Jesus says to her: Touch me not; for I have not yet ascended to my
Father; but go to my brethren and say to them: I ascend to my Father
and your Father, and to my God and your God.
18 Mary Magdalene comes and tells the disciples: I have seen the
Lord; and that he had said these things to her.
19 When therefore evening had come on that day, the first of the
week, and the doors had been closed where the disciples were for fear
of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst, and said to them:
Peace to you.
20 And having said this, he showed them his hands and his side.
Thereupon the disciples rejoiced when they saw the Lord.
21 He then said to them again: Peace to you; as the Father has sent
me, I also send you.
22 And having said this, he breathed on them and said to them:
Receive the Holy Spirit.
23 Whosesoever sins you forgive, they are forgiven them;
whosesoever sins you retain, they are retained.
24 But Thomas, who is called Didymus, one of the twelve, was not
with them when Jesus came.
25 The other disciples therefore said to him: We have seen the Lord.
But he said to them: Unless I see in his hands the print of the nails,
and put my finger into the place of the nails, and put my hand into
his side, I will not believe.
26 And after eight days again his disciples were within, and Thomas
with them. Jesus came, the doors having been shut, and stood in the
midst, and said: Peace to you.
27 Then he says to Thomas: Reach hither thy finger, and behold my
hands, and reach thy hand, and put it into my side, and be not
faithless, but believing.
28 Thomas answered and said to him: My Lord and my God.
29 Jesus says to him: Because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed:
blessed are they that, though not seeing, have yet believed.
30 Many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his disciples,
which are not written in this book;
31 but these are written that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ,
the Son of God, and that, believing, you may have life in his name.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
207
John 21
1 After these things Jesus manifested himself to the disciples at the
sea of Tiberias: and he manifested himself thus.
2 There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas who is called
Didymus, and Nathaniel who was from Cana of Galilee, and the sons
of Zebedee, and two others of his disciples.
3 Simon Peter says to them: I go a fishing. They say to him: We also
are going with thee. They went out and entered the ship, and on that
night they caught nothing.
4 But the morning having now come, Jesus stood on the shore: the
disciples, however, knew not that it was Jesus.
5 Jesus therefore says to them: Children, have you any thing to eat?
(beside bread). They answered him: No.
6 He says to them: Cast the net on the right side of the ship, and you
shall find. They cast therefore, and were no longer able to draw it
because of the multitude of fishes.
7 That disciple whom Jesus loved therefore said to Peter: It is the
Lord. Simon Peter therefore, hearing that it was the Lord, girded on
his upper garment, for he was naked,* and threw himself into the
sea;
* Had on only an undergarment
8 but the other disciples came with the ship (for they were not far
from the land, but about two hundred cubits off), dragging the net of
fishes.
9 Therefore when they had come to the land, they saw a fire of coals
lying, and fish lying on it, and bread.
10 Jesus says to them: Bring of the fish that you have just now taken.
11 Simon Peter came up and drew the net to land, full of great fishes,
a hundred and fifty-three: and though there were so many, the net
was not rent.
12 Jesus says to them: Come and breakfast. But no one of the
disciples ventured to ask him: Who art thou? knowing that it was the
Lord.
13 Jesus comes and takes the bread and gives it to them, and the fish
in like manner.
14 This was now the third time on which Jesus had manifested
himself to the disciples, after he had risen from the dead.
15 Therefore, when they had breakfasted, Jesus says to Simon Peter:
Simon, son of Jonah, lovest thou me more than these? He says to
him: Yes, Lord, thou knowest that I love thee. He says to him: Feed
my lambs.208
Codex Sinaiticus:
16 He says to him again a second time: Simon, son of Jonah, lovest
thou me? He says to him: Yes, Lord, thou knowest that I love thee.
He says to him: Be a shepherd to my sheep.
17 He says to him the third time: Simon, son of Jonah, lovest thou
me? Peter was grieved because he had said to him the third time:
Lovest thou me? And he says to him: Lord, thou knowest all things;
thou knowest that I love thee. He says to him: Feed my sheep.
18 Verily, verily, I say to you, when thou wast young thou didst gird
thyself and walk whither thou wouldst; but when thou shalt become
old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee,
and carry thee whither thou wouldst not.
19 But this he spoke signifying by what kind of death he should
glorify God. And having said this, he says to him: Follow me.
20 Peter turned and saw the disciple that Jesus loved following, who
also reclined at supper on his breast and said: Lord, who is he that
delivers thee up?
21 Peter therefore, seeing this man, says to Jesus: Lord, but what
shall this man do?
22 Jesus says to him: If I will that he remain till I come, what is that
to thee? Follow thou me.
23 Therefore went this saying, forth among the brethren, that that
disciple should not die; and yet Jesus did not say to him: Thou shalt
not die, but: If I will that he remain till I come.
24 This is the disciple that testifies of these things, and that wrote
these things; and we know that his testimony is true.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
209210
Codex Sinaiticus:
The Acts of the Apostles
Acts 1
1 The former discourse I made, O Theophilus, concerning all things
that Jesus began both to do and to teach,
2 till the day in which he was taken up, after he had, through the
Holy Spirit, given commandments to the apostles whom he had
chosen:
3 to whom he also showed himself alive, after he had suffered, by
many infallible proofs, appearing to them for forty days, and
speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God.
4 And being assembled together with them he charged them not to
depart from Jerusalem, but to await the promise of the Father,
which, said he, you heard from me:
5 for John indeed baptized in water, but you shall be baptized in the
Holy Spirit not many days hence.
6 They that had come together therefore asked him, saying: Lord,
dost thou at this time restore the kingdom to Israel? He said to them:
It is not for you to know times or seasons which the Father has
appointed by his own authority;
8 but you shall receive power, after the Holy Spirit has come upon
you, and you shall be my witnesses, both in Jerusalem and in all
Judea, and Samaria, and to the end of the earth.
9 And when he had said these things, as they beheld, he was taken
up, and a cloud received him out of their sight.
10 And while they were looking steadfastly toward heaven as he
departed, behold, two men stood by them in white garments,
11 who also said: Men of Galilee, why stand looking towards heaven?
This Jesus, who has been taken up from you into heaven, shall so
come in like manner as you saw him go into heaven.
12 Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet,
which is near Jerusalem, a sabbath day’s journey.
13 And when they had come in, they went up into an upper room
where they were abiding, both Peter and John, and James and
Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James the
son of Alphaeus, and Simon the Zealot, and Judas the brother of
James.
14 These all continued with one accord in prayer, with the women,
and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brothers.
15 And in these days Peter rose up in the midst of the brethren and
said (and there was a multitude of names together, about a hundred
and twenty):The H. T. Anderson New Testament
211
16 Men, brethren, it was needful that the Scripture should be fulfilled
which the Holy Spirit spoke before through the mouth of David
concerning Judas, who became leader to those that took Jesus;
17 for he was numbered among us, and had obtained the part of this
ministry.
18 This man therefore purchased a field with the reward of iniquity,
and, having fallen headlong, he burst asunder in the midst, and all
his bowels gushed out:
19 which also became known to all that dwell in Jerusalem, so that
that field is called in their own language, Akeldama, that is, a field of
blood.
20 For it is written in the book of Psalms: Let his habitation become
deserted, and let no one dwell in it, and: His overseer’s office let
another take.
21 Therefore of these men who have accompanied us all the time,
during which the Lord Jesus went in and out among us,
22 beginning from the baptism of John, till the day in which he was
taken up from us, must one become a witness with us of his
resurrection.
23 And they appointed two, Joseph, who is called Barsabbas, who
was surnamed Justus, and Matthias.
24 And praying, they said: Thou, Lord, who knowest the hearts of all,
make known which one of these two thou hast chosen,
25 that he may take the place of this ministry and apostleship, from
which Judas turned away to go to his own place.
26 And they gave lots for them; and the lot fell upon Matthias; and
he was numbered with the eleven apostles.
Acts 2
1 And when the day of Pentecost had fully come, they were all
together at the same time.
2 And suddenly there came from heaven a sound as of a rushing,
violent blast, and filled the whole house where they were sitting;
3 and there appeared to them tongues like fire distributing
themselves, and it sat on each one of them;
4 and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to speak
with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance.
5 And there were dwelling in Jerusalem Jews, devout men, from
every nation under heaven;
6 but when this sound had come, the multitude came together and
were perplexed, because they heard them speaking, each one in his
own language.
7 And they were all astonished, and wondered, saying: Behold, are
not all these that speak Galileans?212
Codex Sinaiticus:
8 And how hear we, each one in our own language in which we were
born,
9 Parthians and Medes and Elamites, and we that dwell in
Mesopotamia, Judea also and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia,
10 Phrygia also and Pamphylia, Egypt and the parts of Libya about
Cyrene, and Roman residents, both Jews and proselytes,
11 Cretes and Arabians, how hear we them speaking in our own
tongues, the mighty works of God?
12 And they were all astonished and in doubt, saying one to another:
What can this be?
13 But others, mocking, said: They are full of sweet wine.
14 But Peter, standing up with the eleven, lifted up his voice and said
to them: Men of Judea, and all you that dwell in Jerusalem, be this
known to you, and hearken to my words.
15 For these are not drunk, as you suppose, for it is the third hour of
the day;
16 but this is that which was spoken through the prophet Joel:
17 And it shall come to pass in the last days, says God, I will pour out
of my Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall
prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your old men
shall dream dreams;
18 and indeed on my servants and on my handmaids will I pour out
in those days of my Spirit, and they shall prophesy.
19 And I will show wonders in heaven above and signs In the earth
beneath, blood and fire and vapor of smoke.
20 The sun shall be turned into darkness and the moon into blood,
before the great day of the Lord shall come.
21 And it shall come to pass that whoever shall have called on the
name of the Lord shall be saved.
22 Men of Israel, hear these words: Jesus the Nazarene, a man
eminently distinguished among you on the part of God by mighty
deeds and wonders and signs, which God did through him in the
midst of you, as yourselves know,
23 him delivered up by the fixed counsel and foreknowledge of God,
you, through the hands of lawless men, did crucify and slay:
24 whom God raised up, having loosed the pains of death, inasmuch
as it was not possible that he should be held in subjection by it.
25 For David says in reference to him: I foresaw the Lord always in
my presence, for he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved.
26 Therefore did my heart rejoice and my tongue was glad:
moreover, also, my flesh shall rest in hope,
27 because thou wilt not leave my soul in hades, neither wilt thou
suffer thy Holy One to see corruption.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
213
28 Thou didst make known to me the ways of life, thou shalt make
me full of joy with thy countenance.
29 Men, brethren, I may freely say to you of the patriarch David, that
he both died and was buried, and his sepulcher is among us till this
day.
30 Therefore, being a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with
an oath to him that he would set of the fruit of his loins upon his
throne;
31 foreseeing, he spoke of the resurrection of Christ, that neither was
he left in hades, nor did his flesh see corruption.
32 This Jesus has God raised up, of whom we all are witnesses.
33 Therefore, having been exalted to the right hand of God, and
having received from the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he
has poured out this which you both see and hear.
34 For David did not ascend into the heavens, but himself says: The
Lord said to my Lord: Sit at my right hand,
35 till I make thy enemies thy footstool.
36 Therefore, let all the house of Israel know assuredly that God has
made this same Jesus whom you crucified both Lord and Christ.
37 And hearing it they were pierced to the heart, and said to Peter
and the rest of the apostles: Men, brethren, what must we do?
38 And Peter said to them: Repent, and be baptized every one of you
in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of your sins, and you shall
receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.
39 For the promise is to you and to your children and to all that are
afar off, as many as the Lord our God shall have called.
40 And with many other words did he testify, and exhort them,
saying: Save yourselves from this perverse generation.
41 They therefore gladly received his word and were baptized, and
were added on that day, about three thousand souls.
42 And they continued steadfastly in the teaching of the apostles and
the fellowship, the breaking of the bread and the prayers.
43 And fear came on every soul; and many wonders and signs were
done through the apostles in Jerusalem; and great fear was upon all.
44 And all that believed were together, and had all things in
common;
45 and sold their possessions and goods, and distributed them to all
as any one had need;
46 and continuing daily with one accord in the temple, breaking
bread also from house to house, they partook of food in gladness and
singleness of heart,
47 praising God and having favor with all the people. And the Lord
daily added together the saved.214
Codex Sinaiticus:
Acts 3
1 But Peter and John were going up into the temple, at the hour of
prayer, which is the ninth.
2 And a man, lame from his mother’s womb, was borne along; whom
they laid daily at the gate of the temple that is called Beautiful, to ask
charity from them that went into the temple:
3 who, seeing Peter and John about to go into the temple, asked to
receive charity.
4 But Peter, looking intently upon him with John, said: Look on us.
5 And he gave heed to them, expecting to receive something from
them.
6 But Peter said: Silver and gold have I not; but what I have, this I
give thee: in the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene, walk.
7 And, taking him by the right hand, he raised him up, and
immediately his feet and ankles became strong;
8 and leaping up, he stood and walked, and entered with them into
the temple, walking and leaping and praising God.
9 And all the people saw him walking and praising God;
10 and they recognized him, that it was he that sat for charity at the
Beautiful gate of the temple; and they were filled with amazement
and astonishment at that which had happened to him.
11 But while he was holding Peter and John, all the people ran
together to them in the porch called Solomon’s, greatly amazed.
12 And seeing it, Peter answered to the people: Men of Israel, why
wonder at this man, or on us why earnestly look as if by our own
power of godliness we had made him to walk;
13 The God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob
the God of our fathers, has glorified his servant Jesus, whom you
delivered up, and denied in the presence of Pilate, though he had
determined to release him;
14 the holy and just one you however denied, and demanded that a
murderer should be given to you;
15 but the author of life you slew, whom God raised from the dead, of
whom we are witnesses.
16 And his name, by faith in his name, has made this man strong,
whom you see and know: even the faith that is through him has given
him this entire soundness in the presence of you all.
17 And now, brethren, I know that through ignorance you did it, as
did also your rulers:
18 but the things that God foretold through the mouth of all the
prophets, that his Anointed should suffer, he has thus fulfilled.
19 Repent therefore and turn, that your sins may be blotted out that
seasons of refreshing may come from the presence of the Lord,
20 and he may send him that was destined for you, Christ Jesus,The H. T. Anderson New Testament
215
21 whom heaven must receive, till the times of the restoration of all
things that God has spoken through the mouth of his holy prophets
of ancient times.
22 Moses indeed said: A prophet shall the Lord our God raise up for
you from among your brethren, like me: him shall you hear in all
things whatever he shall say to you.
23 And it shall come to pass that every soul that will not hear that
prophet shall be utterly destroyed from among the people.
24 And all the prophets also, from Samuel and those after, as many
as have spoken, have also foretold these days.
25 You are the sons of the prophets and of the covenant which God
covenanted with our fathers, saying to Abraham: And in thy offspring
shall all the families of the earth be blessed.
26 To you first, God having raised up his Servant, sent him to bless
you, in turning every one away from your iniquities.
Acts 4
1 But as they were speaking to the people, there came upon them the
priests and the captain of the temple and the Sadducees,
2 being vexed because they taught the people, and announced in
Jesus the resurrection from the dead;
3 and they laid their hands on them, and put them in prison till the
morrow; for it was already evening.
4 But many of them that heard the word believed, and the number of
the men amounted to five thousand.
5 And it came to pass on the morrow, that their rulers and the elders
and scribes, came together in Jerusalem,
6 Annas also the chief priest, and Caiaphas and John and Alexander,
and as many as were of the family of the chief priest;
7 and, placing them in the midst, they inquired: In what power or in
what name did you this?
8 Then Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit, said to them: Rulers of the
people and elders,
9 if we are this day examined with respect to the good deed done to
the infirm man, by what means he has been saved,
10 be it known to you all and to all the people of Israel, that in the
name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene, whom you crucified, whom God
raised from the dead, in him does this man stand before you in
health.
11 This is the stone that was set at naught by you builders, which has
become the head of the corner.
12 And salvation is in none other; neither indeed is there another
name under heaven, given among men, by which we must be saved.216
Codex Sinaiticus:
13 And seeing the boldness of Peter and of John, and perceiving that
they were men without learning, and plain, they were astonished;
they also recognized them that they had been with Jesus;
14 and seeing the man that had been cured standing with them, they
had nothing to say in reply.
15 But having commanded them to go out of the Sanhedrim, they
conferred one with another,
16 saying: What must we do to these men? For indeed that a well-
known sign has been done by them is manifest to all that dwell in
Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it;
17 but that it may spread no further among the people, let us severely
threaten them that they speak no more in this name to any one of
men.
18 And having called them, they commanded them to speak not at
all, neither to teach in the name of Jesus.
19 But Peter and John, answering, said to them: Whether it is right in
the sight of God to hear you rather than God, judge you;
20 for we can but speak the things that we have seen and heard.
21 And having further threatened them, they let them go, not finding
how they might punish them, because of the people; for all glorified
God on account of what had been done;
22 for the man on whom this sign of healing had been done was more
than forty years old.
23 But having been let go, they came to their own, and told all that
the chief priests and elders had said to them.
24 And having heard, they, with one accord, lifted up a voice to God
and said: Lord, thou that madest the heaven and the earth and the
sea, and all things that in them are.
25 that through the Holy Spirit by the mouth of our father David thy
servant didst say: Why did Gentiles rage and peoples desire vain
things?
26 The kings of the land stood up, and the rulers were collected
together against the Lord and against his Anointed.
27 For in truth there were collected in this city against thy holy
Servant Jesus, whom thou didst anoint, both Herod and Pontius
Pilate, with Gentiles and peoples of Israel,
28 to do all that thy hand and thy counsel before determined to be
done.
29 And now. Lord, look upon their threatenings, and give to thy
servants to speak thy word with all boldness,
30 in stretching forth thy hand to heal, and that signs and wonders
may be done through the name of thy holy Servant Jesus.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
217
31 And after they had prayed, the place where they were collected
together was shaken; and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit,
and spoke the word of God with boldness.
32 And the heart and the soul of the multitude of believers were one;
and not even one said that any of the things he had was his own; but
they had all things in common.
33 And with great power did the apostles give testimony of the
resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and great grace was upon them all.
34 For neither was there any needy person among them; for as many
as were possessors of lands or of houses sold them, and brought the
prices of the things sold,
35 and laid them at the feet of the apostles; and distribution was
made to each as any one had need.
36 But Joseph, who by the apostles was surnamed Barnabas, which
is, when translated, Son of consolation, a Levite, by birth a Cyprian,
37 having a field, sold it, and brought the money and laid it at the feet
of the apostles.
Acts 5
1 But a certain man named Ananias, with Sapphira his wife, sold a
possession,
2 and kept back part of the price, his wife also having knowledge of it,
and having brought a certain part, laid it at the feet of the apostles.
3 But Peter said: Ananias, why has Satan filled thy heart, that thou
shouldst attempt to deceive the Holy Spirit, and that thou shouldst
keep back part of the price of the field?
4 While it remained, did it not remain thine, and when sold, was it
not in thy own right? Why is it that thou didst conceive this thing in
thy heart? Thou hast not lied to men, but to God.
5 And Ananias, hearing these words, fell down and expired; and great
fear came on all that heard.
6 But the younger men, having risen, wound him up, and, having
carried him out, buried him.
7 But there was an interval of about three hours, and his wife, not
knowing what had been done, came in.
8 And Peter answered to her: Tell me, did you sell the field for so
much? And she said: Yes, for so much.
9 And Peter said to her: Why is it that you have agreed together to
tempt the Spirit of the Lord? Behold, the feet of them that have
buried thy husband are at the door, and shall carry thee out.
10 And she fell down immediately at his feet and expired. And the
young men coming in found her dead, and having carried her out
buried her by her husband.218
Codex Sinaiticus:
11 And great fear came upon the whole church, and upon all that
heard these things.
12 And through the hands of the apostles many signs and wonders
were done among the people: and they were all with one accord in
Solomon’s porch;
13 but of the rest, no one ventured to join himself to them, but the
people magnified them;
14 and believers in the Lord were the more added, multitudes of both
men and women:
15 so that they brought out the sick even into the streets, and laid
them on beds and couches, that even the shadow of Peter as he came
might overshadow some one of them.
16 And there came together also the multitude of the cities round
about Jerusalem, bringing the sick and those oppressed by unclean
spirits, all of whom were cured.
17 But the chief priest arose and all those with him, which is the sect
of the Sadducees, and were filled with zeal,
18 and laid their hands on the apostles and put them in the public
prison.
19 But an angel of the Lord during the night opened the doors of the
prison and brought them out and said:
20 Go, and stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words
of this life.
21 And hearing, they entered about daybreak into the temple and
taught. And the chief priest came and those with him, and called
together the Sanhedrim and all the eldership of the sons of Israel,
and sent to the prison to have them brought.
22 But the attendants came and found them not in the prison; and,
having returned, reported,
23 saying: The prison we found closed in all safety, and the guards
standing before the doors, but on opening we found no one within.
24 And when both the captain of the temple and the chief priests
heard these words, they were in doubt concerning them, what this
might be.
25 And some one came and told them: Behold, the men whom you
put in the prison are in the temple, standing and teaching the people.
26 Then went the captain with the attendants and brought them, not
with violence, for they feared the people, lest they should be stoned.
27 And they brought them and made them stand in the Sanhedrim.
And the chief priest asked them,
28 saying: We strictly charged you not to teach in this name, and
behold, you have filled Jerusalem with your teaching, and you wish
to bring upon us the blood of this man.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
219
29 But answering, Peter and the apostles said: We must obey God
rather than men.
30 The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom you slew by
hanging on a tree:
31 him has God exalted to his right hand as a prince and savior, to
give repentance to Israel and remission of sins.
32 And we are witnesses of these things, and the Holy Spirit, whom
he has given to those that obey him.
33 And hearing, they were cut to the heart, and counseled to kill
them.
34 but there arose a certain one in the Sanhedrim, a Pharisee, named
Gamaliel, a teacher of the law, honored by all the people, and
commanded to put the men out a little while;
35 and said to them: Men of Israel, take heed to yourselves with
respect to these men, what you are about to do.
36 For before these days arose Theudas, saying that himself was
somebody, to whom a number of men, about four hundred, joined
themselves: who was slain, and all as many as were persuaded by
him were scattered and came to naught.
37 After this man arose Judas the Galilean, in the days of the
enrollment, and drew off people after him; and he was destroyed,
and all as many as were persuaded by him were dispersed.
38 And now, I say to you, stand off from these men and let them
alone; for if this counsel or this work be of men, it will come to
naught;
39 but if it is of God, you cannot overthrow them, lest perhaps you
also be found fighting against God.
40 And they were persuaded by him; and having called the apostles
in, and beaten them, they charged them not to speak in the name of
Jesus, and let them go.
41 They then went from the presence of the Sanhedrim rejoicing,
because they were thought worthy to be dishonored for the name.
42 Also every day in the temple and from house to house, they ceased
not to teach and preach Christ Jesus.
Acts 6
1 And in these days, as the disciples were increasing in number, there
arose a murmuring of the Hellenists against the Hebrews, because
their widows were neglected in the daily ministration.
2 But the twelve, calling to them the multitude of the disciples, said:
It is not pleasing to us that we should leave the word of God and
serve tables.
3 But look out, brethren, from among you seven men of good report,
full of spirit and wisdom, whom we will appoint over this business;220
Codex Sinaiticus:
4 and we will attend continually to prayer and the ministry of the
word.
5 And the saying was pleasing in the sight of all the multitude; and
they chose out Stephen, a man full of faith and the Holy Spirit, and
Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and
Nicholas a proselyte of Antioch,
6 whom they placed before the apostles; and they prayed and laid
their hands on them.
7 And the word of God increased, and the number of the disciples
was enlarged in Jerusalem greatly, and a great number of the priests
became obedient to the faith.
8 But Stephen, full of grace and power, did great wonders and signs
among the people.
9 And there arose some of those that were of the synagogue called the
synagogue of the Freedmen, and of the Cyrenians and Alexandrians,
and of those from Cilicia and Asia, disputing with Stephen,
10 and were not able to withstand the wisdom and the spirit with
which he spoke.
11 Then they suborned men to say: We have heard him speak
blasphemous words against Moses and God;
12 and they excited the people and the elders and the scribes; and,
coming upon him, they seized him, and led him to the Sanhedrim;
13 and set up false witnesses who said: This man ceases not to speak
words against the holy place and the law;
14 for we have heard him say that this Jesus the Nazarene shall
destroy this place, and change the customs that Moses delivered to
us.
15 And all that sat in the Sanhedrim, looking earnestly on him, saw
his face as the face of an angel.
Acts 7
1 And the chief priest said: Are these things so?
2 And he said: Men, brethren and fathers, hear. The God of glory
appeared to our father Abraham while he was in Mesopotamia,
before he dwelt in Haran,
3 and said to him: Come out from thy land and from thy kindred, and
come into the land that I will show thee.
4 Then he came out of the land of the Chaldeans and dwelt in Haran.
And thence after his father had died he removed him into this land,
in which you now dwell;
5 and he gave him no inheritance in it, not even a foot-breadth,
though he had promised to give it to him for a possession, and to his
posterity after him, while he had no child.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
221
6 But God spoke thus, that his posterity should sojourn in a strange
land, and they would bring them into bondage, and afflict them four
hundred years;
7 and the nation to which they shall be in bondage will I judge, said
God, and after that ‘they shall come forth and serve me in this place.’
8 And he gave him the covenant of circumcision; and so he begot
Isaac, and circumcised him the eighth day; and Isaac begot Jacob,
and Jacob the twelve patriarchs.
9 And the patriarchs envied Joseph and sold him into Egypt; yet God
was with him,
10 and delivered him from all his afflictions, and gave him favor and
wisdom in the sight of Pharaoh, king of Egypt; and he made him
ruler over Egypt and over all his house.
11 But there came a famine over the whole of Egypt and of Canaan,
and great affliction, and our fathers found no sustenance.
12 And Jacob, hearing that there was grain in Egypt, sent forth our
fathers the first time.
13 And the second time, Joseph was made known to his brothers, and
the race of Joseph became known to Pharaoh.
14 And Joseph sent and called to him his father Jacob, and all his
kindred, seventy-five souls.
15 And Jacob went down into Egypt, and died, himself and our
fathers,
16 and were carried over to Sychem and laid in the sepulcher which
Abraham bought for its value in silver, from the sons of Hamor, the
father of Sychem.
17 But as the time of the promise which God had made to Abraham
drew near, the people increased and multiplied in Egypt,
18 till there arose another king, who knew not Joseph.
19 This man dealt insidiously with our race, and afflicted our fathers,
so that they exposed their infants, that they might not live.
20 At which time Moses was born, and he was beautiful before God.
And he was nursed three months in his father’s house;
21 but when he was exposed, the daughter of Pharaoh took him up
and nursed him as a son for herself.
22 And Moses was instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians; and
he was mighty in his words and deeds.
23 But when the time of forty years was completed for him, it came
into his heart to look after his brethren, the sons of Israel.
24 And, seeing one unjustly treated, he defended him, and avenged
him that was oppressed by smiting the Egyptian.
25 And he thought that his brethren would understand that God,
through his hand, was giving salvation to them; but they understood
not.222
Codex Sinaiticus:
26 And on the following day he showed himself to them as they
fought, and urged them to peace, saying: Men, you are brethren: why
treat one another unjustly?
27 But he that treated his neighbor unjustly thrust him away, saying:
Who appointed thee ruler and judge over us?
28 Wilt thou kill me as thou didst kill the Egyptian yesterday?
29 And at that saying Moses fled and became a sojourner in the land
of Midian, where he begot two sons.
30 And when forty years were completed, there appeared to him in
the wilderness of mount Sinai an angel in flaming fire of a bush.
31 And Moses, seeing, wondered at the sight; but as he drew near to
behold it, there came the voice of the Lord:
32 I am the God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob. And Moses trembled and ventured not to behold.
33 And the Lord said to him: Loose the sandal of thy feet; for the
place on which thou standest is holy ground.
34 I have surely seen the affliction of my people that are in Egypt,
and their groaning have I heard, and I have come down to deliver
them; and now come, I will send thee into Egypt.
35 This Moses, whom they denied, saying: Who appointed thee ruler
and judge? this man God sent both as ruler and deliverer, with the
hand of the angel that appeared to him in the bush.
36 This man led them out after having performed wonders and signs
in the land of Egypt, and in the Red sea, and in the wilderness forty
years.
37 This is the Moses who said to the sons of Israel: A prophet shall
God raise up for you from among your brethren, like me.
38 This is he that was in the assembly in the wilderness, with the
angel that spoke to him in the mount Sinai, and with our fathers;
who received the living oracles to give to us,
39 to whom our fathers would not become obedient, but thrust him
away and turned in their heart to Egypt,
40 saying to Aaron: Make us gods that shall go before us; for this
Moses, who brought us out of the land of Egypt, we know not what
has become of him.
41 And they made a calf in those days and offered sacrifice to the
idol, and rejoiced in the works of their hands.
42 But God turned and delivered them up to serve the host of
heaven, as it is written in the book of the prophets: Victims and
sacrifices did you offer to me forty years in the wilderness, O house of
Israel,
43 and did you take up the tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of the
god Remphan, the images that you made to worship? and I will
remove you beyond Babylon.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
223
44 Our fathers in the wilderness had the tabernacle of testimony, as
he had appointed who spoke to Moses that he should make it
according to the pattern which he had seen;
45 which also our fathers received and brought in with Joshua, when
they took possession of the nations, whom God thrust out from the
face of our fathers till the days of David:
46 who found favor in the sight of God, and asked that he might find
a dwelling for the house of Jacob.
47 But Solomon built him a house.
48 However, the Most High dwells not in places made with hands, as
says the prophet:
49 Heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool: what kind of a
house will you build for me, says the Lord, or what the place of my
rest?
50 Did not my hand make all these things?
51 Stiffnecked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, you always resist
the Holy Spirit, as your fathers, also you.
52 Which of the prophets did not your fathers persecute? and they
killed those who foretold concerning the coming of the Just One, of
whom you have now become the betrayers and murderers:
53 who received the law as the arrangements of angels, and have not
kept it.
54 And hearing these things, they were cut to their hearts, and
gnashed upon him with their teeth.
55 But being full of the Holy Spirit, he looked up into heaven and saw
the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God;
56 and he said: Behold, I see the heavens opened and the Son of man
standing at the right hand of God.
57 And having cried with a loud voice, they stopped their ears and
rushed with one accord upon him,
58 and having cast him out of the city, they stoned him. And the
witnesses laid off their clothes at the feet of a young man called Saul;
59 and they stoned Stephen, calling on the Lord and saying: Lord
Jesus, receive my spirit.
60 And he kneeled down and cried with a loud voice: Lord, let not
this sin stand against them. And having said this, he fell asleep. And
Saul was consenting to his death.
Acts 8
1 And there arose at that day a great persecution against the church
that was in Jerusalem: they were all scattered abroad throughout the
regions of Judea and Samaria, except the apostles.
2 But godly men helped to bury Stephen, and made great
lamentation over him.224
Codex Sinaiticus:
3 But Saul made havoc of the church, entering into every house, and,
dragging men and women, he committed them to prison.
4 They therefore that had been scattered went everywhere, preaching
the word;
5 but Philip went down to the city of Samaria and preached Christ to
them.
6 And the multitudes with one accord gave heed to the things that
were spoken by Philip, when they heard and saw the signs that he
did.
7 For there were many of those that had unclean spirits; these, crying
with a loud voice, came out of them; and many paralytics and lame
persons were cured;
8 and there arose great joy in that city.
9 But a certain man named Simon before this used magic in the city,
and astonished the nation of Samaria, saying that himself was some
great one;
10 to whom they gave heed, from small to great, saying: This man is
the power of God, which is called great.
11 And they gave heed to him because he had for a long time
astonished them with his magic arts.
12 But when they believed Philip, preaching concerning the kingdom
of God and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men
and women.
13 And Simon himself also believed, and having been baptized, he
continued with Philip, and seeing the mighty deeds and signs that
were done, he was astonished.
14 But the apostles that were in Jerusalem, hearing that Samaria had
received the word of God, sent to them Peter and John,
15 who went down and prayed for them, that they might receive the
Holy Spirit.
16 For he had not yet fallen on any one of them, but they had only
been baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus.
17 Then they laid their hands on them, and they received the Holy
Spirit.
18 But Simon, seeing that through the laying on of the apostles’
hands the Spirit was given, offered them money,
19 saying: Give me also this authority, that on whomever I shall have
laid hands, he may receive the Holy Spirit.
20 But Peter said to him: Thy money perish with thee, because thou
hast thought to purchase for thyself with money the gift of God.
21 Thou hast no part, neither lot, in this matter; for thy heart is not
right in the sight of God.
22 Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray the Lord if
perhaps the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee;The H. T. Anderson New Testament
225
23 for I perceive that thou art bitter gall and a bundle of
unrighteousness.
24 But Simon answered and said: Pray you to the Lord for me, that
none of the things that you have spoken may come upon me.
25 They therefore having testified and spoken the word of the Lord,
returned to Jerusalem: they also preached the gospel in many cities
of the Samaritans.
26 But an angel of the Lord spoke to Philip, saying: Arise, and go
toward the south, to the road that goes down from Jerusalem to
Gaza: this is desert.
27 And he arose and went; and behold, a man of Ethiopia, a eunuch,
a high officer of Candace, queen of the Ethiopians, who was over all
her treasure, who had come to Jerusalem to worship,
28 was also returning, and, sitting in his chariot, was reading the
prophet Isaiah.
29 And the Spirit said to Philip: Go forward and join thyself to this
chariot.
30 And running forward, Philip heard him reading Isaiah the
prophet, and said: Understandest thou, then, what thou readest?
31 But he said: How should I unless some one guide me? And he
requested Philip to come up and sit with him.
32 And the passage of Scripture which he was reading was this: As a
sheep for slaughter was he led; and as a lamb before his shearer is
dumb, so opens he not his mouth.
33 In his humiliation his judgment* was taken away: his generation
who shall describe? for his life is taken from the earth.
* The justice due him.
34 And the eunuch answered and said to Philip: I pray thee, of whom
speaks the prophet this? Of himself or of some other man?
35 But Philip opened his mouth and began at the same Scripture, and
preached to him Jesus.
36 And as they went along the road, they came to some water; and
the eunuch says: Behold, water: what hinders me from being
baptized?
37 [no verse]
38 And he commanded the chariot to stop, and both went down into
the water, both Philip and the eunuch, and he baptized him.
39 But when they had come up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord
caught away Philip; and the eunuch saw him no more, for he went on
his way rejoicing.
40 But Philip was found at Azotus; and passing through he preached
the gospel in all the cities till he came to Caesarea.
Acts 9226
Codex Sinaiticus:
1 But Saul, yet breathing threatening and slaughter against the
disciples of the Lord, went to the chief priest
2 and asked of him letters to Damascus to the synagogues, that, if he
should find any of the way, both men and women, he might bring
them bound to Jerusalem.
3 But as he was going, it came to pass that he drew near to
Damascus, and suddenly there flashed around him a light from
heaven;
4 and having fallen to the ground, he heard a voice saying to him:
Saul, Saul,why persecutest thou me?
5 And he said: Who art thou, Lord? And he said: I am Jesus whom
thou persecuteth!
6 But rise, and go into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou
must do.
7 But the men that journeyed with him stood speechless, hearing
indeed the voice, but seeing no one.
8 And Saul arose from the ground; but when his eyes were opened,
he saw nothing; and leading him by the hand, they brought him into
Damascus.
9 And he was three days without sight, and he ate not, neither did he
drink.
10 But there was in Damascus a disciple named Ananias; and the
Lord said to him in a vision: Ananias. And he said: Behold me, Lord.
11 And the Lord said to him: Arise, and go into the street that is
called Straight, and inquire in the house of Judah for one named
Saul, of Tarsus; for behold, he prays,
12 and has seen a man named Ananias coming in and laying his hand
on him, that he may receive sight.
13 But Ananias answered: Lord, I have heard from many of this man,
what evils he has done to thy saints in Jerusalem;
14 and how he has authority from the chief priests to bind all that call
on thy name.
15 But the Lord said to him: Go; for a chosen vessel is this man to
me, to bear my name before Gentiles and kings also, and the sons of
Israel;
16 for I will show him how great things he must suffer for my name.
17 And Ananias went, and entered into the house, and having laid his
hands on him, said: Brother Saul, the Lord Jesus, who appeared to
thee on the way by which thou earnest, has sent me, that thou mayest
receive sight and be filled with the Holy Spirit.
18 And immediately there fell from his eyes as if scales; and he
received sight, and arose and was baptized;
19 and having taken food, he was strengthened. And he was with the
disciples in Damascus some days;The H. T. Anderson New Testament
227
20 and immediately in the synagogues he preached Jesus, that this is
the Son of God.
21 But all that heard were astonished, and said: Is not this he that
destroyed in Jerusalem those that call on this name, and has he not
come hither for this purpose, that he might lead them bound to the
chief priests?
22 But Saul increased the more in strength, and confounded the Jews
that dwelt in Damascus, proving that this is the Christ.
23 But when many days were fulfilled, the Jews counselled together
to kill him;
24 but their plot was made known to Saul. And they also watched the
gates day and night, that they might kill him;
25 and his disciples took him. and by night let him down through the
wall, lowering him in a basket.
26 And when he had come to Jerusalem, he attempted to join himself
to the disciples; and they all feared him, not believing that he was a
disciple.
27 But Barnabas took him, and brought him to the apostles, and told
them how on the way he had seen the Lord, and that he had spoken
to him, and how in Damascus he had spoken boldly in the name of
Jesus.
28 And he was with them going in and out in Jerusalem; speaking
boldly in the name of the Lord,
29 he spoke to, and also disputed with, the Hellenists; but they
undertook to kill him.
30 And the brethren, knowing it, brought him down to Caesarea, and
sent him forth to Tarsus.
31 Then indeed the church throughout the whole of Judea and
Galilee and Samaria had peace, being edified and walking in the fear
of the Lord; and through the aid of the Holy Spirit was multiplied.
32 But it came to pass that Peter, passing through all places, came
down also to the saints that dwell in Lydda.
33 And he found there a man named Aeneas, that had lain on a bed
for eight years, who was a paralytic.
34 And Peter said to him: Aeneas, Jesus Christ restores thee to
health: arise, and make thy bed for thyself. And he immediately
arose;
35 and all that dwelt in Lydda and Saron saw him, and they turned to
the Lord.
36 And there was in Joppa a female disciple named Tabitha, which,
translated, is called Dorcas; she was full of good works and charities
that she did.
37 But it came to pass in those days that, having been taken sick, she
died; and they washed her and laid her in an upper room.228
Codex Sinaiticus:
38 And as Lydda was near to Joppa, the disciples, hearing that Peter
was there, sent two men to him, beseeching: Delay not to come to us,
39 And Peter arose and went with them. When he had come, they
brought him into the upper room; and all the widows stood by him
weeping and showing the coats and garments which Dorcas made
while she was with them.
40 But having put them all out, Peter kneeled down and prayed; and
turning to the body, he said: Tabitha, arise. And she opened her eyes,
and, seeing Peter, she sat up.
41 But giving her a hand, he raised her up; and having called the
saints and widows, he presented her alive.
42 And it became known throughout the whole of Joppa, and many
believed on the Lord.
43 And it came to pass that he remained many days in Joppa with
one Simon, a tanner.
Acts 10
1 But a man in Caesarea named Cornelius, a centurion of the band
called Italian,
2 devout and fearing God with all his house who gave many charities
to the people and prayed to God always,
3 saw in a vision, evidently about the ninth hour of the day, an angel
of God coming in to him and saying to him: Cornelius.
4 But looking earnestly on him and becoming afraid, he said: What is
it, Lord? And he said to him: Thy prayers and thy charities have
come up for a memorial before God.
5 And now, send men to Joppa and call for one Simon, who is
surnamed Peter:
6 he lodges with one Simon, a tanner, who has a house by the sea.
7 And when the angel that spoke to him had gone away, he called two
of the household servants, and a devout soldier of those that waited
on him,
8 and having made known all things to them, he sent them to Joppa.
9 But on the morrow, as they went on their way and drew near to the
city. Peter went up on the housetop to pray, about the sixth hour.
10 And he became very hungry and desired to eat. But while they
made ready, he fell into a trance,
11 and saw heaven opened, and some vessel, like a great sheet,
descending, let down by the four corners upon the earth:
12 in which were all manner of fourfooted beasts, and creeping things
of the earth, and birds of the heaven.
13 And there came a voice to him: Rise, Peter, kill and eat.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
229
14 But Peter said: By no means, Lord, for I have never eaten anything
common and unclean.
15 And a voice came again a second time to him: The things that God
has cleansed call thou not common.
16 And this was done three times, and immediately the vessel was
taken up into heaven.
17 But while Peter was doubting in himself, what the vision that he
had seen might be, behold, the men that had been sent by Cornelius,
having inquired for the house of Simon, stood at the gate,
18 and, calling, asked if Simon who is surnamed Peter lodged there.
19 But while Peter carefully considered about the vision, the Spirit
said to him: Behold, men seek thee;
20 but arise and go down, and go with them, doubting nothing, for I
have sent them.
21 And Peter went down to the men and said: Behold, I am he whom
you seek: what is the cause for which you are present?
22 And they said: Cornelius, a centurion, a man just and fearing God,
well reported of also by all the nation of the Jews, was warned by a
holy angel to send for thee to his house, and to hear words from thee.
23 Having called them in therefore, he lodged them. But on the
morrow he arose and went forth with them; and some of the brethren
that were of Joppa accompanied him.
24 And on the next day he entered into Caesarea; and Cornelius was
looking for him, having called together his relatives and near friends.
25 But as Peter went in, Cornelius met him, fell at his feet and
worshipped.
26 But Peter raised him up, saying: Stand up: I myself also am a
man.
27 And conversing with him, he went in, and found many that had
come together,
28 and said to them: You know that it is not lawful for a man a Jew to
join himself to or go in to one of another race; yet God has showed
me that I must call no man common or unclean:
29 wherefore, having been sent for, I came also without objecting. I
ask therefore, for what purpose have you sent for me?
30 And Cornelius said: Four days ago up to this hour, was I at the
ninth praying in my house; and behold, a man stood before me in
bright clothing,
31 and said: Cornelius, thy prayer is heard, and thy charities are
remembered before God.
32 Send therefore to Joppa, and call for Simon, who is surnamed
Peter; he lodges in the house of Simon a tanner, by the sea.230
Codex Sinaiticus:
33 Immediately therefore I sent to thee, and thou hast done well in
coming. Now therefore we all are present before God, to hear all
things that have been commanded thee by the Lord.
34 And Peter opened his mouth and said: In truth, I comprehend
that God is not a respecter of persons,
35 but in every nation he that fears him and works righteousness is
acceptable to him,
36 the word that he sent to the sons of Israel, preaching peace
through Jesus Christ: he is Lord of all.
37 You know the word that was published throughout the whole of
Judea, beginning from Galilee after the baptism which John
preached,
38 JESUS OF NAZARETH, how God anointed him with the Holy
Spirit and power, who went about doing good and giving health to all
that were oppressed by the devil, for God was with him;
39 and we are witnesses of all things that he did in the country of the
Jews and in Jerusalem: whom they slew by hanging upon a tree.
40 This man God raised on the third day and made him manifest,
41 not to all the people, but to witnesses that were before appointed
by God, to us who
34 ate and drank with him after he had risen from the dead;
42 and he charged us to preach to the people, and to testify that it is
he that has been appointed by God as judge of living and dead.
43 To him give all the prophets witness that, through his name, every
one that believes on him shall receive remission of sins.
44 While Peter was yet speaking these words, the Holy Spirit fell on
all that heard the word.
45 And the believers of the circumcision, as many as came with Peter,
were astonished, because on the Gentile; also the gift of the Holy
Spirit had been poured out;
46 for they heard them speaking with tongues and magnifying God.
Then Peter answered:
47 Can any one forbid water, that those should not be baptized who
have received the Holy Spirit even as we?
48 And he commanded them to be baptized in the name of Jesus
Christ. Then they besought him to remain some days,
Acts 11
but the apostles and the brethren that were throughout Judea heard
that the Gentiles also had received the word of God.
2 And when Peter went up to Jerusalem, they of the circumcision
contended with him,The H. T. Anderson New Testament
231
3 saying: Thou wentest in to men uncircumcised, and didst eat with
them.
4 And Peter began and laid the matter before them in order, saying:
5 I was in a city, Joppa, praying, and I saw in a trance a vision, some
vessel, like a great sheet, descending, let down from heaven by four
corners, and it came even to me.
6 Into which having looked attentively, I observed and saw
fourfooted beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things,
and birds of the heavens.
7 And I heard also a voice saying to me: Rise, Peter, kill and eat.
8 But I said: By no means, Lord, for a common or unclean thing has
never entered my mouth.
9 But a voice answered a second time from heaven: The things that
God has cleansed, call thou not common.
10 And this was done three times, and all were drawn up again into
heaven.
11 And behold, immediately three men, sent from Caesarea to me,
stood at the house in which I was.
12 And the Spirit bade me go with them, nothing doubting. And these
six brethren also went with me, and we entered the man’s house.
13 And he told us how he had seen the angel standing in his house
and saying: Send to Joppa and call for Simon, who is surnamed
Peter,
14 who shall speak words to thee, by which thou shalt be saved, and
all thy house.
15 But when I began to speak, the Holy Spirit fell on them as on us
also in the beginning.
16 And I remembered the word of the Lord, how he said: John
indeed baptized in water, but you shall be baptized in the Holy Spirit.
17 If then God gave to them the like gift as to us also, when we
believed on the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I that I could withstand
God?
18 And when they heard these things they were silent, and glorified
God, saying: Then has God given to the Gentiles also repentance to
life.
19 They therefore that were scattered abroad because of the affliction
that arose against Stephen, travelled as far as Phenice and Cyprus
and Antioch, speaking the word to no one but Jews only.
20 But some of them were men of Cyprus and Cyrene, who came to
Antioch and spoke to the Greeks also, preaching the gospel of the
Lord Jesus.
21 And the hand of the Lord was with them, and a great multitude
that believed turned to the Lord.232
Codex Sinaiticus:
22 And the report concerning them came to the ears of the church
that was in Jerusalem; and they sent forth Barnabas as far as
Antioch:
23 who, having come and seen the grace of God, rejoiced, and
exhorted all that with determination of the heart they should adhere
to the Lord;
24 for he was a man good and full of the Holy Spirit and faith. And a
great multitude was added to the Lord.
25 But he went out to Tarsus to seek for Saul; and he found and
brought him to Antioch.
26 And it happened to them that they met together in the church for
a whole year and taught a great multitude; also, that the disciples
were called Christians first in Antioch.
27 But in those days there came down prophets from Jerusalem to
Antioch;
28 and one of them, named Agabus, rose up, and signified through
the Spirit that there was about to be a great famine over the whole
habitable land: which came to pass in the days of Claudius.
29 And as any one of the disciples was prosperous, they determined
each one of them to send to the relief of the brethren that dwelt in
Judea:
30 which they also did, sending to the elders through the hand of
Barnabas and Saul.
Acts 12
1 But at that time Herod the king laid hands on some of those who
were of the church, to afflict them,
2 And he slew James the brother of John with the sword.
3 And, seeing that it was pleasing to the Jews, he apprehended Peter
also (but these were the days of unleavened bread);
4 whom having seized he put in prison, delivering him to four tetrads
of soldiers to guard him, intending after passover to bring him out to
the people.
5 Peter was, indeed, therefore, kept in prison; but earnest prayer was
made to God by the church for him.
6 But when Herod was about to bring him forth, on that night Peter
was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains: guards
also before the door watched the prison.
7 And behold, an angel of the Lord stood by, and light shone in the
house; and striking Peter on the side, he raised him up, saying: Rise
up quickly. And his chains fell off from his hands.
8 The angel also said to him: Gird thyself, and bind on thy sandals.
And he did so. And he said to him: Throw thy mantle about thee and
follow me.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
233
9 And going out he followed, and knew not that what had been done
by the angel was true, but thought that he saw a vision.
10 But after passing through the first and second guard, they came to
the iron gate that leads into the city, which opened to them of its own
accord; and having gone out they went along one street; and
immediately the angel departed from him.
11 And Peter, having come to himself, said: Now I know in truth that
the Lord has sent his angel, and delivered me from the hand of
Herod and from all the expectation of the people of the Jews.
12 And being aware of this, he went to the house of Mary the mother
of John, who is surnamed Mark, where many were assembled and
praying.
13 But when he knocked at the door of the entrance there came a
maidservant named Rhoda to listen;
14 and recognizing Peter’s voice, she opened not the entrance for joy,
but running in, told that Peter stood before the entrance.
15 But they said to her: Thou art mad. She however, strongly
affirmed that it was so. But they said: It is his angel.
16 Peter, however, continued knocking; and, having opened, they saw
him and were astonished.
17 But beckoning to them with his hand that they should be silent, he
told how the Lord had brought him out of the prison: he said also:
Tell these things to James and the brethren. And he went out and
departed to another place.
18 But when it was day there was no little consternation among the
soldiers, what had become of Peter.
19 But Herod, having sought for him, and not finding him, examined
the guards and commanded them to be put to death; and having
gone down from Judea to Caesarea, he continued there.
20 And he was of hostile mind toward the Tyrians and Sidonians; but
they came to him with one consent, and having gained the good will
of Blastus, who had charge of the king’s bedchamber, they sought for
peace, because their country was sustained by that of the king.
21 And on an appointed day, Herod, having clothed himself in royal
apparel, seated himself on the tribunal and made an oration to them.
22 And the people shouted: The voice of God, and not of a man,
23 But an angel of the Lord immediately smote him, because he gave
not the glory to God; and, having been eaten by worms, he expired.
24 And the word of God increased and multiplied.
25 And Barnabas and Saul returned from Jerusalem, after having
fulfilled the ministry, taking with them also John who was surnamed
Mark.
Acts 13234
Codex Sinaiticus:
1 And there were in the church that was in Antioch prophets and
teachers, both Barnabas and Simon who is called Niger, and Lucius
of Cyrene, Manaen also, the foster brother of Herod the tetrarch, and
Saul.
2 And as they were ministering to the Lord and fasting, the Holy
Spirit said: Set apart to me Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I
have called them.
3 Then, having fasted and prayed and laid hands on them, they sent
them away.
4 They therefore having been sent forth by the Holy Spirit, went
down to Seleucia, and thence they sailed to Cyprus;
5 and being in Salamis they preached the word of God in the
synagogues of the Jews; and they had also John as attendant.
6 But having passed through the whole island as far as Paphos, they
found a man, a magician, a Jewish false prophet, whose name was
BarJesus,
7 who was with the proconsul Sergius Paulus, an intelligent man.
This man called for Barnabas and Saul, and requested to hear the
word of God.
8 But Elymas the magician, for so is his name translated, withstood
them, seeking to turn away the proconsul from the faith.
9 But Saul, who is also Paul, being filled with the Holy Spirit, looked
earnestly upon him
10 and said: O full of all deceit and all mischief, son of the devil,
enemy of all righteousness, wilt thou not cease to pervert the straight
ways of the Lord?
11 And now, behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thee, and thou shalt
be blind, not seeing the sun for a season. And immediately there fell
upon him a mist and darkness, and going about, he sought persons to
lead him by the hand.
12 Then the proconsul, seeing what had been done, believed, being
astonished at the teaching of the Lord.
13 And Paul and his companions, having loosed from Paphos, came
to Perga of Pamphylia; but John departing from them, returned to
Jerusalem.
14 But they continued their journey from Perga and came to Antioch
of Pisidia; and having entered the synagogue on the sabbath day,
they sat down.
15 And after the reading of the law and the prophets, the rulers of the
synagogue sent to them saying: Men, brethren, if there is in you any
word of exhortation for the people, speak.
16 And Paul arose, and, beckoning with Ills hand, said: Men of Israel
and you that fear God, hear.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
235
17 The God of this people Israel chose our fathers, and the people he
exalted during the sojourn in the land of Egypt, and with an uplifted
arm brought he them out of it;
18 and for a time of about forty years he nourished them in the
wilderness;
19 and after he had destroyed seven nations in the land of Canaan, he
divided to them their land for an inheritance,
20 for about four hundred and fifty years. And after this he gave
judges till Samuel the prophet,
21 And after that they asked for a king; and God gave them Saul the
son of Kish, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, forty years;
22 and he removed him and raised up for them David as a king; to
whom he also gave testimony: I have found David the son of Jesse, a
man according to my heart, who shall do all my will.
23 From this man’s posterity, God, according to promise, has
brought to Israel a Saviour, Jesus,
24 John having preached, before his entrance, the baptism of
repentance to all the people of Israel.
25 But as John was fulfilling his course, he said: Who do you suppose
that I am? I am not he: but behold, there comes after me one, the
sandal of whose feet I am not worthy to loose.
26 Men, brethren, sons of the race of Abraham, and those among you
that fear God, to us is the word of this salvation sent.
27 For they that dwell in Jerusalem and their rulers, being ignorant
of this one, and of the voices of the prophets that are read every
sabbath, have fulfilled them in condemning him;
28 and though they found no cause of death, they asked of Pilate that
he might be put to death.
29 And when they had fulfilled all things that are written concerning
him, they took him down from the tree and laid him in a sepulcher.
30 But God raised him from the dead;
31 and he appeared for many days to those that went up with him
from Galilee to Jerusalem: who now are his witnesses to the people.
32 And we announce to you glad tidings of the promise made to the
fathers, that God has fulfilled this to our children by raising up Jesus,
33 as it is also written in the second Psalm: Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee.
34 But that he raised him from the dead no more to return to
corruption, he has thus spoken: I will give you the faithful, holy
things of David.
35 Wherefore he says also in another Psalm: Thou wilt not suffer thy
Holy One to see corruption.236
Codex Sinaiticus:
36 For David indeed, having served his own generation by the
counsel of God, fell asleep and was laid with his fathers and saw
corruption;
37 but he whom God raised up saw no corruption.
38 Be it known to you, therefore, men, brethren, that through this
man is preached to you remission of sins:
39 in this one, every one that believes is justified from all things,
from which you could not be justified in the law of Moses.
40 Take heed, therefore, lest there come upon you that which is said
in the prophets:
41 Behold, you despisers, and wonder, and perish, for I work a work
in your days, a work which you would not believe, though any one
plainly declare it to you.
42 But when they had gone out they besought that these words might
be spoken to them on the next sabbath.
43 And when the synagogue was dismissed, many of the Jews and
devout proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas, who, speaking to
them, persuaded them to continue in the grace of God.
44 And on the next sabbath almost all the city came together to hear
the word of the Lord.
45 But the Jews. seeing the multitudes, were filled with envy, and
spoke against the things spoken by Paul, contradicting and
blaspheming.
46 And Paul and Barnabas, speaking boldly, said: To you was it
needful that the word of God should first be spoken; but since you
thrust it from you and judge yourselves unworthy of eternal life,
behold, we turn to the Gentiles.
47 For so has the Lord commanded us: I have set thee as a light for
the Gentiles, that thou shouldst be for salvation to the end of the
earth.
48 And hearing it, the Gentiles rejoiced, and glorified the word of the
Lord, and as many as had been ordered for eternal life believed;
49 and the word of the Lord was carried throughout the whole
country.
50 But the Jews excited the devout women that were honorable, and
the chief men of the city, and raised a persecution against Paul and
Barnabas, and drove them out from their borders.
51 But having shaken off the dust from their feet against them, they
came to Iconium;
52 and the disciples were filled with joy and the Holy Spirit.
Acts 14The H. T. Anderson New Testament
237
1 And it came to pass in Iconium that they went together into the
synagogue of the Jews, and so spoke that a great multitude of Jews
and also of Greeks believed.
2 But the Jews that believed not excited and imbittered the souls of
the Gentiles against the brethren.
3 A long time therefore spent they speaking, boldly in the Lord, who
gave testimony to the word of his grace by giving signs and wonders
to be done through their hands.
4 But the multitude of the city was divided, and some were with the
Jews and some with the apostles.
5 But when there was a violent intent of the Gentiles and also of the
Jews with their rulers, to outrage and to stone them,
6 being aware of it, they fled to the cities of Lycaonia, Lystra and
Derbe, and the neighboring regions;
7 and there they preached the gospel.
8 And a man in Lystra, without strength in his feet, sat, lame from
his mother’s womb: who had never walked.
9 This man heard Paul speak, who, looking earnestly on him, and
seeing that he had faith to be saved,
10 said with a loud voice: Stand erect on thy feet. And he leaped up
and walked.
11 And the multitudes, seeing what Paul had done, lifted up their
voice, saying in the Lycaonian language: The gods in the likeness of
men have come down to us;
12 and they called Barnabas, Zeus; and Paul, Hermes; because he was
the chief speaker.
13 And the priest of Zeus, who was before the city, having brought
bulls and garlands to the gates, intended to offer sacrifice with the
multitudes.
14 But the apostles Barnabas and Paul, hearing of it, rent their
garments and ran forth among the multitude, crying out
15 and saying: Men, why do these things? We also of like passions
with yourselves are men, preaching the gospel that you turn from
these vanities to the living God, who made the heaven and the earth
and the sea and all things that are in them;
16 who, in the past generations, permitted all the nations to walk in
their own ways:
17 though, indeed, he left himself not without testimony in doing
good, giving you rains from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling your
hearts with food and gladness.
18 And saying these things, they scarcely restrained the multitudes
from offering sacrifice to them.238
Codex Sinaiticus:
19 But there came thither from Antioch and Iconium Jews; and
having persuaded the multitudes and stoned Paul, they dragged him
out of the city, supposing that he was dead.
20 However, as the disciples stood about him, he rose up and came
into the city. And on the next day he went forth with Barnabas to
Derbe.
21 Having preached the gospel to that city also, and having made
many disciples, they returned to Lystra and to Iconium and to
Antioch,
22 strengthening the souls of the disciples, exhorting them to abide
in the faith, and saying that through many afflictions we must enter
into the kingdom of God.
23 But having ordained elders for them in every church, with prayer
and fasting they commended them to the Lord on whom they had
believed.
24 And after passing through Pisidia they came to Pamphylia;
25 and having spoken the word in Perga, they came down to Attalia;
26 and thence sailed to Antioch, whence they had been delivered to
the grace of God for the work which they had accomplished.
27 But after they had arrived and brought the church together, they
related what things God had done with them, and that he had opened
to the Gentiles the door of faith.
28 And they spent not a little time with the disciples.
Acts 15
1 And some went down from Judea and taught the brethren that
unless you shall have been circumcised according to the custom of
Moses, you cannot be saved.
2 But after Paul and Barnabas had had no little dissension and
discussion with them, they arranged that Paul and Barnabas and
some others of them should go up to the apostles and elders at
Jerusalem concerning this question.
3 They therefore, having been conducted on their journey by the
church, passed through Phenice and Samaria, relating the conversion
of the Gentiles; and they caused great joy to all the brethren.
4 But when they had arrived at Jerusalem they were received by the
church and the apostles and the elders: they also announced what
things God had done with them.
5 And there arose some of the sect of the Pharisees, who had
believed, saying that it was necessary to circumcise them: also, to
command that they keep the law;
6 And the apostles and elders came together to consider this matter.
7 But after there had been much discussion, Peter arose and said to
them: Men, brethren, you know that at the first days God madeThe H. T. Anderson New Testament
239
choice among you, that by my mouth the Gentiles should hear the
word of the gospel and believe.
8 And God, who knows the heart, bore them testimony by giving
them the Holy Spirit even as to us,
9 and made no distinction between us and them, having purified
their hearts by faith.
10 Now, therefore, why tempt God by putting a yoke upon the neck of
the disciples which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear?
11 But, through the grace of the Lord Jesus, we believe that we shall
be saved in the same manner as they.
12 And the whole multitude kept silence and heard Barnabas and
Paul relate what signs and wonders God had done among the
Gentiles through them.
13 But after they were silent, James answered, saying: Men, brethren,
hear me.
14 Simeon has related how God at the first looked down to take from
the Gentiles a people for his name.
15 And with this agree the words of the prophets, as it is written:
16 After this I will return and build again the tabernacle of David,
which has fallen down, and its ruins I will build again, and I will set it
up,
17 that the men that are left over may seek the Lord, and all the
Gentiles on whom my name has been called,
18 says the Lord who does these things known from eternity.
19 Wherefore I judge that we trouble not them that from among the
Gentiles are turning to God,
20 but that we write to them to abstain from the pollutions of idols,
and from lewdness, and from what is strangled, and from blood.
21 For Moses has, from ancient generations, in every city, them that
preach him, being read in the synagogues every sabbath day.
22 Then it seemed good to the apostles and the elders with the whole
church, to choose men from among themselves and send them to
Antioch, with Paul and Barnabas; Judas who is called Barsabbas, and
Silas, leading men among the brethren,
23 having written by their hand: The apostles and the elder brethren,
to the brethren who are of the Gentiles in Antioch and Syria and
Cilicia, wish health.
24 Since we have heard that some have gone out from among us and
troubled you with words, subverting your souls, to whom we gave no
commandment;
25 it seemed good to us, having been of one mind, to choose men and
send them to you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul;
26 who are men that have delivered up their lives for the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ.240
Codex Sinaiticus:
27 We have sent, therefore, Judas and Silas, who will tell the same
things by word.
28 For it seemed good to the Holy Spirit, and us, to lay on you no
greater burden than these necessary things,
29 that you abstain from things sacrificed to idols, and blood, and
things strangled, and lewdness; from which if you keep yourselves
you will do well. Farewell.
30 They therefore having been dismissed came to Antioch; and when
they had gathered the multitude together they delivered the letter.
31 And having read it, they rejoiced at the consolation.
32 Judas also and Silas, who were prophets themselves, with much
discourse exhorted the brethren, and strengthened them;
33 but having remained for a time, they were dismissed with peace
from the brethren to those that had sent them.
34 [no verse]
35 But Paul and Barnabas continued in Antioch, teaching and
preaching, with many others also, the word of the Lord.
36 And after some days Paul said to Barnabas: Let us return now and
look after the brethren in every city in which we preached the word of
the Lord how they do.
37 And Barnabas wished to take with them John who is called Mark;
38 but Paul thought it right not to take with them this one, who had
turned away from them from Pamphylia, and had not gone with
them to the work.
39 And there arose a sharp contention, so that they separated one
from the other; and Barnabas took with him Mark and sailed to
Cyprus.
40 But Paul chose Silas and went forth, after having been delivered
to the grace of God by the brethren;
41 and he passed through Syria and Cilicia, strengthening the
churches.
Acts 16
1 And he came down to Derbe and Lystra. And behold, a disciple was
there named Timothy, son of a believing Jewess, but of a Grecian
father:
2 who was well reported of by the brethren in Lystra and Iconium.
3 Paul desired that this man should go forth with him; and he took
him and circumcised him, on account of the Jews that were in those
places; for all knew his father that he was a Greek.
4 And as they journeyed through the cities they delivered to them, for
their observance, the decrees that had been made by the apostles and
elders that were in Jerusalem.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
241
5 The churches therefore were strengthened in faith and increased in
number daily.
6 But they passed through Phrygia and the region of Galatia, being
forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in Asia;
7 but having come towards Mysia, they attempted to go into
Bithynia; and the Spirit of Jesus did not permit them;
8 and having passed by Mysia they came down to Troas.
9 And a vision appeared to Paul by night; a man of Macedonia stood
beseeching him and saying: Come over into Macedonia and help us.
10 And when he had seen the vision we immediately sought to go
forth into Macedonia, concluding that the Lord had called us thither
to preach the gospel to them.
11 But sailing from Troas, we came by a straight course to
Samothrace, and on the next clay to Neapolis,
12 and thence to Philippi, which is the first city of the region of
Macedonia, a colony. And we were in that city abiding some days.
13 And on the sabbath day we went forth out of the gate by the river,
where we supposed there was a house of prayer; and sitting down, we
spoke to the women that had come together.
14 And a woman named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the city of
Thyatira, who worshipped God, heard; whose heart the Lord opened
to attend to the things spoken by Paul.
15 But when she was baptized, and her house, she besought, saying:
If you have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house
and abide; and she constrained us.
16 But it came to pass as we went to the house of prayer that a
maidservant, possessed of a soothsaying spirit, met us: who brought
her owners much gain by soothsaying.
17 She, following Paul and us, cried out, saying: These men are
servants of God Most High, who announce to us the way of salvation.
18 And this she did for many days. But Paul was grieved, and,
turning, said to the spirit: I charge thee in the name of Jesus Christ to
come out of her; and it came out the same hour.
19 But her owners, seeing that the hope of their gain had gone, seized
Paul and Silas and dragged them into the market before the rulers;
20 and bringing; them to the commanders, said: These men do
greatly disturb our city, being Jews,
21 and announce customs which it is not allowed us to receive nor do,
being Romans.
22 And the multitude rose up together against them; and the
commanders, having torn off their garments, gave orders to beat
them with rods;
23 and having laid many stripes upon them, they cast them into
prison, charging the keeper of the prison to guard them securely:242
Codex Sinaiticus:
24 who, as he had received such charge, cast them into the inner
prison, and made their feet fast in the stocks.
25 But about midnight Paul and Silas prayed and sung a hymn to
God; and the prisoners listened to them.
26 And suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that the
foundations of the prison were shaken: immediately, also, were all
the doors opened, and the bonds of all were loosed.
27 But the keeper of the prison, having been roused from sleep, and
seeing the doors of the prison open, drew his sword and was about to
kill himself, supposing that the prisoners had fled.
28 But Paul called with a loud voice, saying: Do thyself no harm; for
we are all here.
29 And having called for a light, he sprang in, and trembling, fell
before Paul and Silas.
30 and, bringing them out, said: Sirs, what must I do to be saved?
31 And they said: Believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou shalt be saved
and thy house.
32 And they spoke to him the word of the Lord, with all that were in
his house.
33 And he took them at that hour of the night and washed the blood
from their stripes, and was baptized, himself and all his, straightway:
34 and having brought them into the house, he set a table before
them, and rejoiced with all his house in having believed in God.
35 But when it was day, the commanders sent the lectors*, saying:
Release those men.
* lictors or rod-bearers
36 And the keeper of the prison told these words to Paul: The
commanders have sent that you shall be released: now, therefore,
come out and go in peace.
37 But Paul said to them: Having beaten us publicly, uncondemned,
men that are Romans, they cast us into prison; and now do they put
us out secretly? Not so: but let them come and bring us out
themselves.
38 And the lictors told these words to the commanders; and they
were afraid when they heard that they were Romans;
39 and they came and entreated them, and leading them out, asked
them to depart from the city.
40 But after going out from the prison they went to Lydia, and when
they had seen the brethren they exhorted them and went forth.
Acts 17
1 But having passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to
Thessalonica, where was a synagogue of the Jews.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
243
2 And, according to his custom, Paul went in to them, and for three
sabbath days he discoursed to them from the Scriptures;
3 opening and laying before them that the Christ must needs have
suffered, and risen from the dead; and that this is Christ Jesus whom
I preach to you.
4 And some of them were convinced and were allotted to Paul and
Silas, of the devout Greeks also a great multitude, and of the chief
women not a few.
5 But the Jews, filled with envy, and taking with them some evil men
that were about the markets, and collecting a mob, excited a tumult
in the city, and coming upon the house of Jason, sought to bring
them before the people;
6 but not finding them, they dragged Jason and some brethren
before the rulers of the city, crying out: These that have thrown the
world into confusion have come hither also;
7 whom Jason has received; and these all act in opposition to the
decrees of Caesar, saying that there is another king, Jesus.
8 And they disquieted the multitude and the rulers of the city when
they heard these things;
9 and having taken security of Jason and the rest, they dismissed
them.
10 But the brethren immediately sent away Paul and Silas by night to
Beroea: who, on coming thither, went into the synagogue of the Jews.
11 These were more nobleminded than those in Thessalonica; and
they received the word with all readiness, searching the Scriptures
day by day, whether these things were so.
12 Many of them therefore believed, also of honorable Grecian
women, and of men not a few.
13 But when the Jews of Thessalonica knew that the word of God was
preached by Paul in Beroea, they came thither, exciting and
disturbing the multitudes.
14 But immediately then the brethren sent away Paul to go as far as
to the sea; and Silas and Timothy remained there.
15 But they that conducted Paul brought him as far as Athens; and
having received commandment for Silas and Timothy, that they
should come to him as soon as possible, they departed.
16 But while Paul waited for them in Athens, his spirit was stirred
within him when he saw the city full of idols.
17 He therefore reasoned in the synagogue with the Jews, and the
devout persons, and in the market every day with those that
happened to meet him.
18 But some of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers disputed with
him, and some said: What can this babbler wish to say? Others said:244
Codex Sinaiticus:
He seems to be a proclaimer of strange demons; because he preached
Jesus and the resurrection.
19 And they took him and brought him to the Areopagus, saying: Can
we know what new teaching this is that is spoken by thee?
20 for thou bringest some strange things to our ears: we desire,
therefore, to know what these things may be.
21 Now, all the Athenians and resident strangers have leisure for
nothing else than to tell or hear something new.
22 But Paul, standing in the midst of the Areopagus, said: Men of
Athens, I look upon you as, in all respects, more religious than
others.
23 For in passing through, and observing the objects of your worship.
I found also an altar on which had been inscribed: To AN
UNKNOWN GOD. What, therefore, you ignorantly worship, this I
announce to you.
24 God, who made the world and all things that are in it, he being
Lord of heaven and earth, dwells not in temples made with hands,
25 nor is he served by human hands as if he needed anything, since
he gives to all life and breath and all things;
26 he also made of one every nation of men to dwell on all the face of
the earth, having fixed the times before appointed, and the limits of
their habitations,
27 to seek God, if perhaps they would feel and find him not far from
each one of us.
28 For in him we live and move and are, as also some of your own
poets have said: For we also his offspring are.
29 Therefore, being the offspring of God, we ought not to think that
the godhood is like gold, or silver, or stone, the sculptured work of art
and of a man’s device.
30 The times, therefore, of ignorance God having overlooked, now
announces to all men everywhere that they repent,
31 inasmuch as he has appointed a day in which he will judge the
world in righteousness in a man whom he has ordained, giving faith
to all by having raised him from the dead.
32 But hearing of a resurrection of the dead, some mocked; others
said: We will hear thee even again concerning this matter.
33 Thus Paul went out from the midst of them:
34 some men, however, having attached themselves to him, believed:
among whom was Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman named
Damaris, and others with them.
Acts 18
1 After this he departed from Athens and came to Corinth.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
245
2 And finding a Jew named Aquilla, born in Pontus, having lately
come from Italy, and Priscilla his wife, because Claudius had
commanded all Jews to depart from Rome, he went to them;
3 and because he was of the same trade he abode with them, and
worked; for by trade they were tentmakers.
4 But he discoursed in the synagogue every sabbath, and persuaded
Jews and Greeks.
5 But when Silas and Timothy had come from Macedonia, Paul was
wholly engaged in the word, testifying to the Jews that the Christ was
Jesus.
6 But as they set themselves in opposition and blasphemed, he shook
his clothing and said to them: Your blood be upon your head: clean I
will henceforth go to the Gentiles.
7 And departing thence, he came into the house of one named Titus
Justus, who worshipped God, whose house joined the synagogue.
8 But Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue, believed on the Lord with
all his house; and many of the Corinthians, hearing, believed and
were baptized.
9 But the Lord spoke through a vision in the night to Paul: Fear not,
but speak and be not silent,
10 because I am with thee, and , no one shall make an assault upon
thee to maltreat thee, for I have much people in this city.
11 And he continued a year and six months, teaching among them the
word of God.
12 But when Gallio was proconsul of Achaia, the Jews, with one
consent, rose up against Paul, and brought him to the tribunal,
13 saying: This person induces men to worship God contrary to the
law.
14 But when Paul was about to open his mouth, Gallio said to the
Jews: If, indeed, there were any wrong or wicked mischief, O Jews, I
would with reason bear with you;
15 but if there are questions about a word, and names, and your law,
see to it yourselves: I will not be a judge of these things.
16 And he drove them from the tribunal.
17 But all took Sosthenes, the ruler of the synagogue, and beat him
before the tribunal; and none of these things were a care to Gallio.
18 But Paul, after remaining yet many days, took leave of the
brethren and sailed to Syria; and with him Priscilla and Aquila,
having shorn his head in Cenchrea, for he had a vow.
19 And they arrived at Ephesus; and he left them there, but went
himself into the synagogue and discoursed to the Jews.
20 And though they requested him to remain a longer time, he did
not consent;246
Codex Sinaiticus:
21 but taking leave and saying: I will return to you again, if God will,
he sailed from Ephesus;
22 and arriving at Caesarea, he went up and saluted the church, and
went down to Antioch;
23 and having spent some time he went forth, passing in order
through the country of Galatia, and Phrygia, strengthening all the
disciples.
24 But a Jew named Apollos, born in Alexandria, an eloquent man
and mighty in the Scriptures, came to Ephesus.
25 He was instructed in the way of the Lord, and, being fervent in
spirit, he spoke and taught accurately the things concerning Jesus,
knowing only the baptism of John:
26 he also began to speak boldly in the synagogue. But after hearing
him, Priscilla and Aquila took him, and explained to him more
correctly the way of God.
27 And as he wished to go over to Achaia, the brethren encouraged
him, and wrote to the disciples to receive him cordially. Who, on
coming, gave much strength to the believers through his grace;
28 for he with power utterly confuted the Jews publicly, showing
through the Scriptures that the Christ is Jesus.
Acts 19
1 But it came to pass while Apollos was in Corinth that Paul, having
passed through the upper districts, came to Ephesus and found some
disciples:
2 he also said to them: Did you receive the Holy Spirit when you
believed? And they said to him: No: but we did not even hear
whether there is a Holy Spirit.
3 And he said: Into what, then, were you baptized? And they replied:
Into John’s baptism.
4 And Paul said: John baptized with the baptism of repentance,
saying to the people that they should believe on Him that was coming
after him, that is, on Jesus.
5 And when they had heard, they were baptized into the name of the
Lord Jesus;
6 and when Paul had laid hands on them, the Holy Spirit came on
them, and they spoke with tongues and prophesied.
7 And all the men were about twelve.
8 But he entered the synagogue and spoke boldly for three months,
discoursing, and persuading the things concerning the kingdom of
God.
9 But when some were hardened and believed not, and spoke evil of
the way before the multitude, he withdrew from them and separated
the disciples, discoursing daily in the school of Tyrannus.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
247
10 And this continued for two years, so that all that dwelt in Asia
heard the word of the Lord, both Jews and Greeks.
11 Mighty deeds, also, that were unusual did God through the hands
of Paul;
12 so that even to the sick there were carried from his body
handkerchiefs or aprons, and diseases departed from them: the evil
spirits also went out.
13 But some also of the wandering Jewish exorcists undertook to
name over those that had evil spirits the name of the Lord Jesus,
saying: I adjure you by the Jesus whom Paul preaches.
14 And there were some, seven sons of Sceva, a Jewish chief priest,
who did this.
15 But the evil spirit, answering, said to them: Jesus I acknowledge
and Paul I know; but who are you?
16 And the man in whom the evil spirit was leaped upon them,
gained the mastery over them both, and prevailed against them, so
that they fled from that house naked and wounded.
17 And this became known to all, both Jews and Greeks, that dwelt in
Ephesus, and fear fell upon them all; and the name of the Lord Jesus
was magnified:
18 many also of those that had believed came confessing and
declaring their deeds.
19 And many of them that practiced magic arts brought their books
together and burned them in the presence of all; and they computed
the value of them, and found it fifty thousands of silver.
20 So mightily the word of the Lord grew and prevailed.
21 But when these things had been accomplished. Paul purposed in
spirit, after having passed through Macedonia and Achaia, to go to
Jerusalem, saying: After I have been there I must also see Rome.
22 And having sent into Macedonia two of them that waited on him,
Timothy and Erastus, he remained for a time in Asia.
23 But there arose at that time no small commotion about the way.
24 For one, Demetrius by name, a silversmith, by making silver
shrines of Diana, brought no little gain to the artists:
25 whom he called together with those that worked in such things,
and said: Men, you know that from this trade arises our wealth;
26 and you see and hear that not only at Ephesus, but throughout
almost all Asia, this Paul has persuaded and drawn off a great
multitude, saying that they are not gods that are made with hands.
27 And not only is this trade of ours in danger of coming into
disrepute, but also the temple of the great goddess Diana will be
counted as nothing; and she also, whom all Asia and the world
worships, will be deposed from her majesty.248
Codex Sinaiticus:
28 But having heard and having become filled with wrath, they cried
out, saying: Great is Diana of the Ephesians.
29 And the city was filled with confusion; and they rushed with one
accord into the theater, after seizing Gaius and Aristarchus,
Macedonians, Paul’s fellow-travellers.
30 But when Paul wished to go in to the people, the disciples did not
permit him;
31 and some of the rulers of Asia also, being friendly to him, sent to
him and besought him not to trust himself in the theater.
32 Some therefore cried out one thing and some another; for the
assembly was confused, and the greater part knew not for what cause
they had come together.
33 But out of the crowd they brought forward Alexander, the Jews
putting him forward; and Alexander, waving his hand, intended to
make a defense to the people.
34 But, perceiving that he was a Jew, all with one voice cried out for
about two hours: Great is Diana of the Ephesians.
35 But the town-clerk, having quieted the multitude, said: Men of
Ephesus, what man is there, then, that does not know that the city of
the Ephesians is the templekeeper of the great Diana, and of the
image that fell down from Jupiter?
36 Therefore, as these things cannot be contradicted, you ought to be
quiet and do nothing rashly.
37 For you have brought these men who are neither robbers of
temples nor blasphemers of your goddess.
38 If, then, Demetrius and the artists with him have a matter against
any one, court-days are kept, and there are proconsuls; let them
bring charges one against the other.
39 But if you seek for anything further, it shall be determined in a
lawful assembly.
40 For we are in danger of having charges laid against us concerning
this day’s tumult, there being no cause in relation to which we shall
be able to give an account of this concourse.
41 And when he had said this, he dismissed the assembly.
Acts 20
1 But after the tumult had ceased, Paul having sent for the disciples
and exhorted them, took leave, and departed to go into Macedonia.
2 And having passed through those regions and exhorted them with
much speech, he came into Greece;
3 and after remaining three months, a plot having been laid for him
by the Jews as he was about to sail to Syria, he resolved to return
through Macedonia.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
249
4 But there followed him, Sopater the son of Pyrrhus, a Beroean; and
of the Thessalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus, and Gaius of Derbe,
and Timothy; and of the Asiatics, Tychicus and Trophimus: and
5 these went before and waited for us in Troas;
6 but we sailed after the days of unleavened bread from Philippi, and
came to them at Troas in five days, where we spent seven days.
7 But on the first of the week, when we came together to break bread,
Paul discoursed to them, about to depart on the morrow, and
continued his speech till midnight.
8 And there were many lamps in the upper room where we had come
together.
9 And a young man, named Eutychus, who sat in the window, being
oppressed with deep sleep, as Paul discoursed for a longer time, was
borne down by sleep, and fell down from the third story, and was
taken up dead.
10 But Paul went down and fell upon him and embracing him said:
Be not troubled; for his life is in him.
11 And he went up and broke bread and ate; and having talked a long
time till break of day, he thus departed.
12 And they brought the young man alive, and were comforted not a
little.
13 But we went in advance to the ship, and sailed to Assos, thence
intending to take Paul in; for so had he arranged, intending himself
to go on foot.
14 But when he met us at Assos, we took him in and came to
Mitylene;
15 and sailing thence, on the following day we came opposite Chios;
and on the next day we arrived at Samos; and we came on the
following day to Miletus.
16 For Paul had determined to sail past Ephesus, that he might not
spend time in Asia; for he hastened, if it was possible for him, to be
in Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost.
17 But from Miletus he sent to Ephesus and called for the elders of
the church.
18 And when they had come to him, he said to them: You know, from
the first day on which I came into Asia. how I was with you the whole
time,
19 serving the Lord with all lowliness of mind, and with tears, and
trials that befell me by the plots of the Jews:
20 how I shunned to declare to you nothing that is profitable, and
taught you publicly and from house to house,
21 testifying to Jews and also to Greeks repentance toward God, and
faith that is toward our Lord Jesus Christ.250
Codex Sinaiticus:
22 And now behold, bound in spirit I am going to Jerusalem, not
knowing the things that will come upon me there,
23 except that the Holy Spirit in every city testifies to me, saying that
bonds and afflictions await me.
24 But I esteem of no value the life dear to myself, so that I finish my
course and the ministry which I received from the Lord Jesus, fully to
testify the gospel of the grace of God.
25 And now behold, I know that you all, among whom I have gone
preaching the kingdom, will see my face no more.
26 Wherefore I solemnly affirm to you this day that I am clean from
the blood of all;
27 for I shunned not to declare to you all the counsel of God.
28 Take heed therefore to yourselves and to all the flock, in which the
Holy Spirit made you overseers, that you act as shepherds to the
church of the Lord, which he purchased with his own blood.
29 For I know that there shall come in among you, after my
departure, grievous wolves, not sparing the flock;
30 and from among yourselves there shall arise men speaking
perverse things to draw off the disciples after them.
31 Therefore, watch, remembering that night and day for three years
I ceased not with tears to warn each one.
32 And now I commend you to God and to the word of his grace, who
is able to build you up and give you an inheritance among all the
sanctified.
33 I coveted no man’s silver or gold or raiment:
34 yourselves know that to my own wants, and to those that were
with me, these hands did minister.
35 In all things I showed you, that thus laboring you ought to sustain
the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, for he said:
It is more blessed to give than to receive
36 And having said these things he kneeled down and prayed with
them all.
37 And all wept much; and falling on Paul’s neck they kissed him,
38 sorrowing most of all for the word that he had spoken that they
should see his face no more. And they conducted him to the ship.
Acts 21
1 But when it came to a pass that we had set sail after having
departed from them, running by a straight course we came to Cos,
and on the next day to Rhodes, and thence to Patara.
2 And finding a ship that was passing over to Phoenicia, we
embarked and set sail.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
251
3 but having come in view of Cyprus, and leaving it to the left, we
sailed to Syria, and landed at Tyre: for there the ship was to put off
the lading.
4 But finding the disciples, we remained there seven days; and these
said to Paul through the Spirit that he should not go to Jerusalem.
5 But when it came to pass that we had completed the days, we went
out and departed, all conducting us with wives and children, till we
were out of the city; and having knelt on the shore and prayed,
6 we finished taking leave one of the other, and went on board the
ship, but they returned home.
7 But we, having finished the voyage from Tyre, came to Ptolemais,
and having saluted the brethren remained with them one day.
8 But on the morrow we departed and came to Caesarea, and
entering the house of Philip the evangelist, who was of the seven, we
abode with him.
9 This man had four virgin daughters that prophesied.
10 But as we remained more days, there came down from Judea a
prophet, named Agabus.
11 And coming to us, and taking Paul’s girdle, he bound his own feet
and hands, and said: These things says the Holy Spirit: The man to
whom this girdle belongs shall the Jews in Jerusalem thus bind, and
deliver into the hands of the Gentiles.
12 But when we heard these things, both we and they of that place
besought him not to go up to Jerusalem.
13 And Paul answered and said: What do you effect by weeping and
breaking my heart? for I am ready not only to be bound, but also to
die in Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.
14 And as he was not persuaded, we were silent, saying: The will of
the Lord be done.
15 But after these days we prepared for the journey, and went up to
Jerusalem;
16 and some of the disciples from Caesarea went with us, bringing
Mnason, a Cyprian, an old disciple, with whom we should lodge.
17 And when we came to Jerusalem, the brethren received us gladly.
18 But on the following day Paul went in with us to James; and all the
elders were present.
19 And having saluted them, he related one by one each of the things
that God had done among the Gentiles through his ministry.
20 And when they had heard, they glorified God, and said to him:
Thou seest, brother, how many myriads of believers there are; and all
are zealots for the law;
21 and they have learned concerning thee that thou teachest apostasy
from Moses to all the Jews that are among the Gentiles, telling them252
Codex Sinaiticus:
not to circumcise their children, nor to walk according to the
customs.
22 What is it then? a multitude must by all means come together; for
they will hear that thou hast come.
23 Do thou this that we tell thee: We have four men who have a vow
upon them;
24 take them with thee and purify thyself with them, and pay
expenses for them that they may shave their heads; and all will know
that there is nothing of the things that they have learned concerning
thee; but that thou thyself also walkest, keeping the law.
25 But with regard to the Gentiles that have believed, we have
written, after deciding that they keep themselves from what is
sacrificed to idols, and from blood, and what is strangled, and from
lewdness.
26 Then Paul, taking the men, on the following day purified himself
with them, and entered into the temple, announcing that he would
keep the full number of the days of purification, till an offering
should be made for each one of them.
27 But when the seven days were about to be completed, the Jews
from Asia, having seen him in the temple, threw all the multitude
into confusion and laid hands on him,
28 crying out: Men of Israel, help; this is the man that teaches all
everywhere against the people, and the law, and this place; and
further, he has brought Greeks also into the temple, and has defiled
this holy place.
29 For they had previously seen in the city with him Trophimus the
Ephesian, whom they supposed that Paul had brought into the
temple.
30 And the whole city was moved, and there was a concourse of the
people; and seizing Paul, they dragged him out of the temple, and
immediately the doors were closed.
31 And while they were seeking to kill him, report was brought to the
officer of the band that the whole of Jerusalem was in confusion;
32 and he immediately took with him soldiers and centurions and
ran down to them; but when they saw the officer and the soldiers,
they ceased to beat Paul.
33 Then the officer came near and took him, and commanded him to
be bound with two chains, and inquired who he was and what he had
done.
34 But some cried one thing and some another in the multitude; and
as he was not able to ascertain the certainty on account of the tumult,
he commanded him to be brought into the fortress.
35 But when he was on the steps, it happened that he was borne by
the soldiers on account of the violence of the multitude;The H. T. Anderson New Testament
253
36 for the multitude of the people followed, crying out: Away with
him.
37 And as he was about to be brought into the fortress. Paul said to
the officer: May I speak to thee? He replied: Hast thou a knowledge
of Greek?
38 Art thou then not the Egyptian, that before these days made
insurrection and led out into the wilderness the four thousand men
of the assassins?
39 But Paul said: I am indeed a Jewish man, a Tarsean, a citizen of
no unknown city of Cilicia; and I beseech thee, permit me to speak to
the people.
40 And when he had given permission, Paul, standing upon the
steps, waved his hand to the people; and as there was much silence,
he addressed them in the Hebrew tongue, saying:
Acts 22
1 Men, brethren and fathers, hear my present defense to you.
2 And when they heard that he addressed them in the Hebrew
tongue, they the more kept silence. And he said:
3 I am a Jewish man, having been born in Tarsus of Cilicia, but
brought up in this city, educated at the feet of Gamaliel, according to
the exactness of the paternal law; being a zealot for God, as all of you
are this day,
4 I persecuted this way even to death, binding and delivering into
prisons both men and women.
5 as the chief priest, also, will testify for me, and all the presbytery;
from whom also having received letters to the brethren. I was
journeying to Damascus, to bring those that were there also bound to
Jerusalem, that they might be punished.
6 But it came to pass as I was journeying and drawing near to
Damascus about midday, suddenly there flashed around me a great
light from heaven,
7 and I fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to me: Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me?
8 But I answered: Who art thou, Lord? And he said to me: I am Jesus
the Nazarene, whom thou persecutest.
9 And those that were with me saw indeed the light, but understood
not the voice of him that spoke to me.
10 But I said: What shall I do. Lord? And the Lord said to me; Arise,
and go into Damascus, and there it shall be told thee of all things
which it has been appointed thee to do.
11 But when I did not see on account of the glory of that light, being
led by the hand by those that were with me, I came into Damascus.254
Codex Sinaiticus:
12 And one Ananias, a devout man according to the law, well
reported of by all the Jews that dwelt there,
13 came to me and stood, by and said to me: Brother Saul, receive
sight. And in the same hour I looked upon him.
14 And he said: The God of our fathers has chosen thee to know his
will and to see the Just One, and to hear a voice from his mouth,
15 because thou shalt be for him a witness to all men of what thou
hast seen and heard.
16 And now why delayest thou? Arise and be baptized and wash away
thy sins, calling on his name.
17 But it came to pass after I had returned to Jerusalem, and while I
was praying in the temple, that I was in a trance;
18 and saw him saying to me: Hasten and go quickly out of
Jerusalem, for they will not receive thy testimony concerning me.
19 And I said: Lord, they know that I imprisoned and scourged
throughout the synagogues those that believed on thee;
20 and when the blood of Stephen thy witness was shed, I also stood
by and approved, and kept the garments of those that killed him.
21 And he said to me: Go, for I will send thee far off to the Gentiles.
22 And they heard him to this word, and lifted up their voice, saying:
Away with such a man from the earth; for it is not fit that he should
live.
23 And as they were crying out, and throwing off their garments, and
casting dust into the air,
24 the officer commanded him to be led into the fortress, giving
orders that he should be examined with scourging, that he might
know for what cause they cried so against him.
25 But as they stretched him forward for the scourge, Paul said to the
centurion that stood by: Is it lawful for you to scourge a man that is a
Roman, and uncondemned?
26 And the centurion, hearing it, came and reported to the officer,
saying: What art thou about to do? for this man is a Roman.
27 But the officer came and said to him: Tell me, art thou a Roman?
And he said: Yes.
28 The officer answered: I purchased this citizenship at a great price.
But Paul said: I, however, was born so.
29 Therefore they that were about to examine him immediately
departed from him; and the officer also was afraid, having learned
that he was a Roman, and because he had bound him.
30 But on the morrow, wishing to know the certainty of that of which
he was accused by the Jews, he loosed him and commanded the chief
priests and all the Sanhedrim to assemble, and brought Paul down
and placed him among them.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
255
Acts 23
1 But Paul, looking earnestly on the Sanhedrim, said: Men, brethren,
with all good conscience have I lived to God till this day.
2 And the chief priest Ananias commanded those that stood by him
to smite him on the mouth.
3 Then Paul said to him: God will smite thee, whited wall; and sittest
thou to judge me: according to the law, and in violation of law
commandest thou me; to be smitten?
4 But those that stood by said: Revilest thou God’s chief priest?
5 And Paul replied: I knew not, brethren, that he was chief priest; for
it is written: Thou shalt not speak evil of the ruler of thy people.
6 But Paul, knowing that the one part belonged to the Sadducees and
the other to the Pharisees, cried out in the Sanhedrim: Men,
brethren, I am a Pharisee, a son of Pharisees: concerning the hope
and the resurrection of the dead am I judged.
7 And when he had said this, there arose a dissension of the
Pharisees and the Sadducees, and the multitude was divided.
8 For the Sadducees say that there is no resurrection, neither angel
nor spirit; but the Pharisees confess both.
9 And there arose a great cry; and some of the scribes of the part of
the Pharisees arose and contended, saying: We find no fault in this
man; but what if a spirit has spoken to him, or an angel?
10 But as there arose much dissension, the officer, fearing lest Paul
might be torn in pieces by them, commanded the soldiers to go down
and take him by force from the midst of them and lead him into the
fortress
11 But on the following night the Lord stood by him and said: Take
courage: for as thou hast testified concerning me in Jerusalem, so
must thou testify also in Rome.
12 But when it was day, the Jews collected together and bound
themselves by a curse, saying that they would neither eat nor drink
till they had killed Paul,
13 And there were more than forty that made this conspiracy;
14 these came to the chief priests and the elders and said: We have
bound ourselves by a great curse that we will taste nothing till we
have killed Paul.
15 Now therefore do you with the Sanhedrim make known to the
officer that he may bring him down to you, as if you would inquire
more particularly into his case; but we are ready to kill him before he
shall have come near.
16 But the son of Paul’s sister, having heard of the plot, came and
entered the fortress and told Paul.
17 And Paul called to him one of the centurions and said: Conduct
this young man to the officer, for he has something to tell him.256
Codex Sinaiticus:
18 He then took him and brought him to the officer and said: The
prisoner Paul called me to him and requested me to conduct this
young man to thee, as he has something to tell thee.
19 And the officer took him by the hand and withdrew to a private
place, and inquired: What is it that thou hast to tell me?
20 And he said: The Jews have agreed to request thee that thou
wouldst, on the morrow, bring Paul down into the Sanhedrim, as if
thou wouldst inquire somewhat more particularly concerning him.
21 Thou therefore be not persuaded by them; for there lie in wait for
him more than forty men of them, who have bound themselves by a
curse neither to eat nor to drink till they shall have killed him; and
now they are ready, awaiting the promise from thee.
22 Then the officer dismissed the young man, saying: I charge thee to
tell no one that thou hast made these, things known to me,
23 And calling some two of the centurions to him, he said: Make
ready two hundred soldiers that they may go to Caesarea, and
seventy horsemen, and two hundred light-armed men, at the third
hour of the night:
24 also, that they should provide beasts, that they might set Paul on
them and carry him in safety to Felix the governor;
25 And he wrote a letter containing this form:
26 Claudius Lysias to the most noble Felix wishes health.
27 This man, taken by the Jews and about to be killed by them, I
came with soldiers and rescued, having learned that he was a Roman;
28 wishing also to know the cause on account of which they accused
him, I brought him down into their Sanhedrim:
29 I found him accused concerning questions of their law, but having
nothing charged against him worthy of death or of bonds.
30 But as I was informed that a plot was about to be laid by them for
the man, I sent him to thee, charging his accusers also to lay their
charges before thee.
31 The soldiers therefore, as it had been appointed them, took Paul
and brought him during the night to Antipatris;
32 but on the morrow, leaving the horsemen to go with him, they
returned to the fortress.
33 These, after entering Caesarea and delivering the letter to the
governor, presented Paul also before him.
34 But having read it, and inquired of what province he was, and
having learned that he was from Cilicia, he said: I will hear thee when
thy accusers also have come; and he commanded him to be kept in
Herod’s palace.
Acts 24The H. T. Anderson New Testament
257
1 But after five days, the chief priest Ananias came down with some
elders and an orator, Tertullus; and these informed the governor
against Paul.
2 And when he had been called Tertullus began to accuse him saying:
3 Since through thee we enjoy much peace, and worthy deeds have
been done for this nation by thy foresight, we accept it always and
everywhere, most noble Felix, with all thankfulness
4 But that I may not detain thee longer, I beseech thee to hear us in
thy clemency for a short time.
5 For we have found this man a pest and a mover of sedition among
all the Jews that are throughout the world, a ringleader also of the
sect of the Nazarenes;
6 who also at tempted to defile the temple: him we also seized,
7 [no verse]
8 from whom thou thyself canst by examination learn concerning all
things of which we accuse him.
9 And the Jews also joined in, saying that these things were so.
10 And Paul answered, after the governor had nodded to him to
speak: Knowing that thou hast for many years been a judge over this
nation, I do readily make a defense for myself.
11 as thou canst know that there are not more than twelve days since
I went up to Jerusalem to worship.
12 And neither in the temple did they find me disputing with any one,
or making a tumult of the people, nor in the synagogues nor through
the city:
13 nor are they able to prove the things of which they now accuse me.
14 But I confess this to thee that, according to the way which they call
sect, so worship I the God of my fathers, believing all things that are
written throughout the law, and those in the prophets,
15 having hope toward God, which they also accept, that there shall
be a resurrection of both just and unjust.
16 And on this account do I exercise myself to have always a
conscience void of offense toward God and man.
17 But after many years I had come to bring charities to my nation,
and offerings;
18 while engaged in these things they found me purified in the
temple, not with multitude, neither with tumult; but there are some
Jews from Asia
19 who ought to be present before thee, and bring accusation, if they
have anything against me.
20 Or let these very men say what they found as wrong, while I stood
before the Sanhedrim,
21 except in this one word that I uttered while standing among them:
Concerning the resurrection of the dead am I judged by you this day.258
Codex Sinaiticus:
22 But Felix, as he had a more accurate knowledge concerning the
way, put them off, saying: When Lysias the officer has come, I will
thoroughly know your matters;
23 and he commanded the centurion to keep him, and let him have
liberty, and to forbid no one of his friends to minister to him.
24 But after some days Felix came with his wife Drusilla, who was a
Jewess, and sent for Paul, and heard him concerning the faith in
Christ Jesus.
25 But as he reasoned of righteousness and temperance and the
judgment that is to come, Felix became alarmed and answered:
Depart for the present: but I will take a convenient time and call for
thee,
26 hoping also at the same time that money would be given him by
Paul: wherefore he called for him more frequently and conversed
with him.
27 But when two years had been completed, Felix received Porcius
Festus as a successor: wishing also to confer a favor on the Jews,
Felix left Paul bound.
Acts 25
1 Festus therefore, having come into the province, after three days
went up from Caesarea to Jerusalem;
2 and the chief priests and the first men of the Jews informed him
against Paul, and besought him,
3 asking a favor against him, that he would send for him to
Jerusalem, laying a plot to kill him on the way.
4 Festus therefore answered that Paul was under guard in Caesarea,
and that he himself would soon go forth.
5 Therefore, said he, let those amongst you that have power go down,
and, if there is any wrong in this man, accuse him.
6 But after spending among them not more than eight or ten days, he
went down to Caesarea: on the morrow, having sat on the tribunal,
he commanded Paul to be brought.
7 But when he had come, the Jews that had come down from
Jerusalem stood around him, bringing many and heavy accusations,
which they were not able to prove;
8 Paul answering in defense: Neither against the law of the Jews, nor
against the temple, nor against Caesar, have I sinned in any way.
9 But Festus, willing to confer favor on the Jews, answered and said
to Paul: Wilt thou go up to Jerusalem, and there be judged before me
concerning these things
10 But Paul said: Before the tribunal of Caesar am I standing where I
ought to be judged. Jews have I wronged in nothing, as thou very
well knowest.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
259
11 If, then, I am a doer of wrong, and have committed any act worthy
of death, I refuse not to die; but if there is nothing of the things of
which these accuse me, no one can deliver me as a favor to them. To
Caesar I appeal.
12 Then Festus, having conferred with the council, answered: To
Caesar thou hast appealed, to Caesar thou shalt go.
13 But when some days had passed, Agrippa the king and Bernice
came down to Caesarea to salute Festus.
14 And as they were spending more days there, Festus laid Paul’s
case before the king, saying: There is a man left in bonds by Felix,
15 concerning whom, when I was at Jerusalem, the chief priests and
the elders of the Jews informed me, asking for judgment against him:
16 to whom I answered that it is not the custom of the Romans to
deliver any man up as a favor, before the accused has had the
accusers face to face, and has taken an opportunity for defense
concerning the charge.
17 When, therefore, they had come hither together, making no delay,
I, on the next day, sat upon the tribunal and commanded the man to
be brought;
18 against whom his accusers, when they stood up, brought no evil
accusation in regard to such things as I supposed,
19 but had some questions against him concerning their own
religion, and concerning a Jesus that had died, who, Paul affirmed,
was alive.
20 But being in doubt with regard to the inquiry concerning these
things, I asked if he would go to Jerusalem and there be judged
concerning these.
21 And as Paul appealed to be kept for the examination of Augustus, I
commanded him to be kept till I could send him to Caesar.
22 And Agrippa said to Festus: I also could wish to hear the man
myself. Tomorrow, said he, thou shalt hear him.
23 On the morrow, therefore, when Agrippa and Bernice had come
with great pomp, and had entered the audience-chamber with the
officers and the chief men of the city, and when Festus had
commanded, Paul was brought.
24 And Festus said: King Agrippa, and all men that are present with
us, ye see this man concerning whom all the multitude of the Jews
have dealt with me, both in Jerusalem and here, crying out that he
ought to live no longer.
25 But I perceived that he had done nothing worthy of death, and as
this man himself has appealed to Augustus I determined to send him.
26 Concerning whom I have nothing certain to write to my Lord;
wherefore I have brought him before you and especially before thee,260
Codex Sinaiticus:
King Agrippa, that after the examination has been held, I may have
what shall write;
27 for it seems to me unreasonable in sending a prisoner not also to
make known the charge against him.
Acts 26
1 But Agrippa said to Paul: Thou art permitted to speak for thyself.
Then Paul stretched forth his hand and made his defense.
2 I think myself happy, king Agrippa, because I shall make a defense
this day before thee, concerning all things of which I am accused by
the Jews;
3 especially as thou art acquainted with all the customs and
questions that are among the Jews: wherefore I beseech thee to hear
me patiently.
4 My manner of life, then, from youth, which at the first was among
my own nation and in Jerusalem, know all the Jews,
5 who know me from the beginning, if they would testify, that
according to the strictest sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee.
6 And now I stand judged for the hope of the promise made by God
to the fathers,
7 to which hope our twelve tribes, persistently serving night and day,
hope to come; concerning which hope, O king, I am accused by the
Jews.
8 Why is it judged incredible among you that God raises the dead?
9 I then thought with myself that I ought to do many things in
opposition to the name of Jesus the Nazarene;
10 which I also did in Jerusalem, and many also of the saints did I
shut up in prisons, having received the authority from the chief
priests; and when they were put to death I readily gave my vote;
11 and punishing them often throughout all the synagogues, I
compelled them to blaspheme; and being exceedingly mad against
them, I persecuted them even to foreign cities.
12 While engaged in these things, and going to Damascus with the
authority and commission of the chief priests,
13 at midday, while on the road, I saw, O king, a light from heaven
above the brightness of the sun, shining round about me and those
that journeyed with me;
14 and when we had all fallen to the ground, I heard a voice saying to
me in the Hebrew tongue: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? it is
hard for thee to kick against the goads.
15 But I said: Who art thou, Lord? and the Lord said: I am Jesus,
whom thou persecutest,The H. T. Anderson New Testament
261
16 But rise and stand upon thy feet: for I have appeared to thee for
this purpose, to appoint thee a minister and a witness of the things
that thou hast seen, and of those in which I will appear to thee,
17 delivering thee from the people and from the Gentiles, to whom
now I send thee,
18 to open their eyes, in order to turn them from darkness to light,
and from the authority of Satan to God, that they may receive
remission of sins, and inheritance among the sanctified by faith that
is in me.
19 Wherefore, king Agrippa, I became not disobedient to the
heavenly vision;
20 but, to those in Damascus first, and also to those in Jerusalem,
and throughout all the country of Judea, and to the Gentiles, I
announced that they should repent and turn to God, doing works
worthy of repentance.
21 Because of these things, the Jews, having seized me while I was in
the temple, attempted to kill me.
22 Having therefore obtained help that is from God, up to this day
have I stood testifying to both small and great, saying nothing else
than the things that the prophets and Moses did say should take
place,
23 that Christ should suffer, that he first by a resurrection from the
dead should show light both to the people and the Gentiles.
24 But as he spoke these things in his defense, Festus, with a loud
voice, said: Paul, thou art mad: much learning leads thee to madness.
25 But Paul said: I am not mad, most noble Festus, but I utter words
of truth and soberness.
26 For the king, before whom I also boldly speak, knows concerning
these things; for I am persuaded that none of these things have
escaped his notice; for this was not done in a corner.
27 King Agrippa, believest thou the prophets? I know that thou
believest.
28 But Agrippa said to Paul: With little labor thou persuadest me so
as to make me a Christian.
29 And Paul said: I could pray to God that not only thou, but also all
that hear me this day, would, both with little and with much labor,
become such as I am, except these bonds.
30 And the king rose up, and the governor, and Bernice, and those
that sat with them;
31 and having withdrawn, they conversed one with another, saying:
This man does nothing worthy of death or of bonds.
32 And Agrippa said to Festus: This man could have been set at
liberty, if he had not appealed to Caesar.262
Codex Sinaiticus:
Acts 27
1 But when it had been determined that we should sail to Italy, they
delivered Paul and some other prisoners to a centurion named
Julius, of the Augustan band.
2 And embarking in a ship of Adramyttium, that would sail to the
places in Asia, we set sail, Aristarchus, a Macedonian of
Thessalonica, being with us;
3 and on the following day we landed at Sidon, and Julius treated
Paul humanely and permitted him to go to the friends and receive
attention.
4 And thence, having launched, we sailed under Cyprus, because the
winds were adverse;
5 and having sailed through the sea that is opposite to Cilicia and
Pamphylia, we came to Myra of Lycia.
6 And there, the centurion, finding a ship of Alexandria sailing to
Italy, put us into it.
7 But, sailing slowly for many days, and having with difficulty come
opposite Knidus, the wind not permitting us to go further, we sailed
under Crete, opposite Salmone;
8 and sailing along by it with difficulty we came to a place called Fair
Havens, near which was a city, Lasea.
9 But as much time had been spent, and as sailing was now unsafe
because the fast was already past, Paul admonished,
10 saying to them: Men, I perceive that the voyage will be with injury
and much loss, not only of the cargo and of the ship, but also of our
lives.
11 But the centurion had more confidence in the pilot and the owner
of the ship than in the things spoken by Paul.
12 And the harbor being not well situated to winter in, the greater
number resolved to set sail thence, if by any means they should be
able to reach Phoenix and winter there, a harbor of Crete, looking to
the southwest and northwest.
13 But as the south wind blew softly, supposing that they had gained
their purpose, they loosed and sailed along near to Crete.
14 But not long after, a tempestuous wind called Euraquilon struck
against it;
15 and the ship having been caught, and not being able to bear up
against the wind, we gave it up and were driven.
16 And running under an island called Clauda, we were scarcely able
to become masters of the boat;
17 having taken it up, they used aids, undergirding the ship; and
fearing lest they should fall into the Syrtis, they lowered the tackling,
and so were driven.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
263
18 But as we were greatly tossed by the tempest, on the following day
they threw out the cargo,
19 and on the third day with their own hands they threw out the
furniture of the ship;
20 but neither sun nor stars appearing for many days, and no small
tempest lying upon us, all hope of our being saved was finally taken
away.
21 And after there had been much abstinence from food, then Paul
stood in the midst of them and said: It behooved you, O men, having
been persuaded by me, not to have sailed from Crete and to have
avoided this injury and loss.
22 Yet, now I exhort you to be cheerful; for there shall be no loss of
life among you, but of the ship.
23 For there stood by me this night an angel of God, whose I am, and
whom I serve,
24 saying: Fear not, Paul; thou must stand before Caesar; and
behold. God has given thee all that sail with thee.
25 Wherefore be cheerful, O men; for I believe God, that it will be so
as it has been told me.
26 But we must be cast upon some island.
27 But when the fourteenth night had come, as we were driven up
and down in the Adriatic sea, about midnight the sailors supposed
that some land was drawing near to them.
28 And having sounded, they found twenty fathoms; but having gone
a little further and sounded again, they found fifteen fathoms;
29 and fearing lest we should fall among rocks, they threw four
anchors from the stern and wished that day would come.
30 But as the sailors were seeking to flee from the ship, and were
letting down the boat into the sea, under the pretence that they
would let go anchors from the prow,
31 Paul said to the centurion and the soldiers: Unless these remain in
the ship, you cannot be saved.
32 Then the soldiers cut away the ropes of the boat and let it fall off.
33 But till day should come, Paul exhorted all to partake of food,
saying: This day is the fourteenth day since you have waited and
continued fasting, having taken nothing.
34 Wherefore I exhort you to partake of food; for this is for your
safety; for from the head of no one of you shall a hair perish.
35 And having said these things and taken bread, he gave thanks to
God in the presence of all and after breaking, he began to eat
36 And they all became cheerful am took food.
37 But we that were in the ship were in all two hundred and seventy-
six souls.264
Codex Sinaiticus:
38 And having been satisfied with food, they lightened the ship by
throwing the grain into the sea.
39 But when day had come, they knew not the land but they
perceived an inlet that had a beach, into which they determined if
possible, to thrust the ship.
40 And cutting away the anchors they let them fall into the sea at the
same time loosing the fastenings of the rudders, and, hoisting the
front sail to the wind, they held the ship firm to the beach.
41 But falling into a place where two seas met they ran the ship
aground; and the prow, having stuck fast, remained immovable, but
the stern was broken by the violence.
42 And the advice of the soldiers was that they should kill the
prisoners, lest some should swim out and escape;
43 but the centurion, wishing to save Paul, kept them from their
purpose, and commanded those that could swim to throw themselves
off first, and go to land,
44 and the rest, some on planks, and some on pieces of the ship. And
so it came to pass that all got safe to land.
Acts 28
1 And when we were safe, then we learned that the island was called
Melita.
2 And the barbarians showed us unusual kindness; for, having
kindled a fire, they received all of us on account of the rain that had
come upon us, and on account of the cold.
3 But when Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks and laid it on the
fire, a viper came out because of the heat and fastened on his hand.
4 And when the barbarians saw the beast hanging from his hand,
they said one to another: Surely this man is a murderer, whom,
though saved from the sea, justice does not permit to live.
5 He then shook the beast off into the fire, and suffered no evil;
6 and they were expecting that he would become inflamed or
suddenly fall down dead. But after looking for a long time and seeing
no harm come to him, they changed their mind and said that he was
a god.
7 But in the neighborhood of that place were the estates of the first
man of the island, named Publius, who received us and for three days
entertained us courteously.
8 And it happened that the father of Publius lay sick of fever and
dysentery, to whom Paul went in; and having prayed and laid his
hands on him, he restored him to health.
9 But when this had been done, the rest also in the island that had
diseases came and were cured;The H. T. Anderson New Testament
265
10 who in also honored us with many honors; and when we put to
sea, supplied us with what was needed.
11 But after three months we put to sea in a ship of Alexandria that
had wintered in the island, that had the sign of the Dioscuri.
12 And having landed at Syracuse, we remained three days:
13 whence, coasting about, we came to Rhegium. And after one day,
the south wind having risen, we came on the second day to Puteoli,
14 where we found brethren, and were entreated to remain with them
seven days and so we came to Rome.
15 And thence the brethren, hearing of our affairs, came to meet us as
far as Appii Forum and The Three Taverns: whom when Paul saw he
thanked God and tool courage.
16 But when we had come to Rome, Paul was permitted to dwell by
himself with the soldier that guarded him.
17 And it came to pass after three days that he called together those
that were first among the Jews; and when they had come together, he
said to them: Men, brethren, though I had done nothing against the
people, or the customs of the fathers, I was delivered as a prisoner
from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans;
18 who, having examined me, were willing to release me, because
there was no cause of death in me;
19 but as the Jews spoke against it, I was compelled to appeal to
Caesar: not that I have anything to accuse my nation of.
20 I have then called you for this reason, that I may see you and
speak to you; for on account of the hope of Israel am I bound with
this chain.
21 And they said to him; We have neither received letters from Judea
concerning thee, nor has any one of the brethren come and reported
or spoken any evil concerning thee.
22 But we think worthy to hear from thee what thou thinkest; for
concerning this sect we know that it is everywhere spoken against.
23 And having appointed him a day, many came to him at his
lodging; to whom, with full testimony, he set forth the kingdom of
God, persuading them also concerning Jesus, both from the law of
Moses and the prophets, from morning till evening.
24 And some believed the things spoken, and some believed not;
25 but not being agreed among themselves, they departed, after Paul
had spoken one word: Well did the Holy Spirit speak through Isaiah
the prophet to your fathers,
26 saying: Go to this people and say: By hearing you shall hear and
shall not understand, and seeing you shall see and shall not perceive;
27 for the heart of this people has become fat, and with their ears
they hear heavily, and their eyes they have closed: lest perhaps they266
Codex Sinaiticus:
should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand
with their heart, and turn and I should restore them to health.
28 Be it known to you, therefore, that to the Gentiles has this
salvation of God been sent; and they will hear.
30 And he dwelt two whole years in his own rented house, and
received all that came to him,
31 preaching the kingdom of God and teaching the things concerning
the Lord Jesus with all boldness, without hindrance.
Acts 29 (From the Sonnini Manuscript)
1 And Paul, full of the blessings of Christ, and abounding in the spirit,
departed out of Rome, determining to go into Spain, for he had a
long time proposed to journey thitherward, and was minded also to
go from thence to Britain.
2 For he had heard in Phoenicia that certain of the children of Israel,
about the time of the Assyrian captivity, had escaped by sea to ‘the
Isles afar off’ as spoken by the Prophet, and called by the Romans
Britain.
3 And the Lord commanded the gospel to be preached far hence to
the Gentiles, and to the lost sheep of the House of Israel.
4 And no man hindered Paul: for he testified boldly of Jesus before
the tribunes and among the people; and he took with him certain of
the brethren which abode with him at Rome, and they took shipping
at Ostium and having the winds fair, were brought safely into a haven
of Spain.
5 And much people were gathered together from the towns and
villages, and the hill country; for they had heard of the conversion of
the Apostles, and the many miracles which he had wrought.
6 And Paul preached mightily in Spain, and great multitudes believed
and were converted, for they perceived he was an apostle sent from
God.
7 And they departed out of Spain, and Paul and his company finding
a ship in Armorica sailing unto Britain, they were therein, and
passing along the South Coast, they reached a port called Raphinus.
8 Now when it was voiced abroad that the Apostle had landed on
their coast, great multitudes of the inhabitants met him, and they
treated Paul courteously and he entered in at the east gate of their
city, and lodged in the house of an Hebrew and one of his own
nation.
9 And on the morrow he came and stood upon Mount Lud and the
people thronged at the gate, and assembled in the Broadway, and he
preached Christ unto them, and they believed the Word and
testimony of Jesus.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
267
10 And at even the Holy Ghost fell upon Paul, and he prophesied,
saying, Behold, in the last days the God of Peace shall dwell in the
cities, and the inhabitants thereof shall be numbered: and in the
seventh numbering of the people, their eyes shall be opened, and the
glory of their inheritance shine forth before them. The nations shall
come up to worship on the mount that testifieth of the patience and
long suffering of a servant of the Lord.
11 And in the latter-days new tidings of the gospel shall issue forth
out of Jerusalem, and the hearts of the people shall rejoice, and
behold, fountains shall be opened, and there shall be no more plague.
12 In those days there shall be wars and rumours of war; and a King
shall rise up, and his sword, shall be for the healing of the nations,
and His peacemaking shall abide, and the glory of His Kingdom a
wonder among princes.
13 And it came to pass that certain of the Druids came unto Paul
privately, and showed by their rites and ceremonies that they were
descended from the Judahites which escaped from bondage in the
land of Egypt, and the Apostle believed these things, and he gave
them the kiss of peace.
14 And Paul abode in his lodgings three months confirming in the
faith and preaching Christ continually.
15 And after these things, Paul and his brethren departed from
Raphinus and sailed unto Atium in Gaul.
16 And Paul preached in the Roman garrison and among the people,
exhorting all men to repent and confess their sins.
17 And there came to him certain of the Belgae to enquire of him of
the new doctrine, and of the man Jesus; and Paul opened his heart
unto them and told them all things that had befallen him, howbeit
that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners; and they
departed pondering among themselves the things which they had
heard.
18 And after much preaching and toil, Paul and his fellow labourers
passed into Helvetia, and came to Mount Pontius Pilate, where he
who condemned the Lord Jesus dashed himself down headlong, and
so miserably perished.
19 And immediately a torrent gushed out of the mountain and
washed his body, broken in pieces, into a lake.
20 And Paul stretched forth his hands upon the water, and prayed
unto the Lord saying, O Lord God, give a sign unto all nations that
here Pontius Pilate which condemned thine only-begotten Son,
plunged down headlong into the pit.
21 And while Paul was yet speaking, behold, there came a great
earthquake, and the face of the waters was changed, and the form of
the lake like unto the Son of Man hanging in an agony upon the
Cross.268
Codex Sinaiticus:
22 And a voice came out of Heaven saying, Even Pilate hath escaped
the wrath to come for he washed his hands before the multitude at
the blood shedding of the Lord Jesus.
23 When, therefore, Paul and those that were with him saw the
earthquake, and heard the voice of the angel, they glorified God, and
were mightily strengthened in the spirit.
24 And they journeyed and came to Mount Julius where stood two
pillars, one on the right hand and one on the left hand, erected by
Caesar Augustus.
25 And Paul, filled with the Holy Ghost, stood up between the two
pillars, saying, Men and brethren these stones which ye see this day
shall testify of my journey hence; and verily I say, they shall remain
until the outpouring of the spirit upon all nations, neither shall the
way be hindered throughout all generations.
26 And they went forth and came unto Illtricum, intending to go by
Macedonia into Asia, and grace was found in all the churches, and
they prospered and had peace. AmenThe H. T. Anderson New Testament
269270
Codex Sinaiticus:
Paul to the Romans
Romans 1
1 Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, a called apostle, set apart to the
gospel of God,
2 which he announced beforehand through his prophets in the holy
Scriptures,
3 concerning his Son, who was born of the posterity of David
according to the flesh,
4 who was constituted Son of God in power, according to the spirit of
holiness, from the resurrection of the dead, Jesus Christ our Lord,
5 through whom we received grace and apostleship in order to the
obedience of faith among all the nations for his name’s sake,
6 among whom are you also the called, of Jesus Christ:
7 to all that are in Rome, beloved of God, called saints. Grace to you
and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
8 First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ concerning you all, that
your faith is spoken of in all the world.
9 For God is my witness, whom I serve in my spirit in the gospel of
his Son, how unceasingly I make mention of you,
10 always in my prayers making request if by any means now at last I
may be prospered in the will of God to come to you.
11 For I greatly desire to see you, that I may share with you some
spiritual gift, in order that you may be strengthened;
12 that is, that I may be comforted together among you through the
faith that is in each other, both yours and mine.
13 But I desire that you be not ignorant, brethren, that I often
purposed to come to you, and have been hindered to the present
time, that I might have some fruit also among you, even as among
the rest of the Gentiles.
14 Both to Greeks and to Barbarians, both to wise and to unwise, am
I debtor:
15 so as far as I am able, I am ready to preach the gospel to you also
that are in Rome.
16 For I am not ashamed of the gospel; for it is the power of God in
order to salvation to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and also
to the Greek.
17 For in it is revealed God’s righteousness by faith for faith; as it is
written: He that is righteous by faith shall live.
18 For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men that repress the truth in
unrighteousness;The H. T. Anderson New Testament
271
19 because that which is known of God is manifest in them, for God
has manifested it to them.
20 For his attributes which are invisible, since the creation of the
world, are clearly seen, being perceived by the things that are made,
both his eternal power and divinity, so that they are without excuse;
21 because, though they knew God, they did not glorify him as God,
or give him thanks, but became vain in their reasonings, and their
heart, void of understanding, was darkened.
22 Professing to be wise, they became fools,
23 and exchanged the glory of the incorruptible God for the likeness
of an image of corruptible man, and of birds, and fourfooted beasts,
and creeping things.
24 Wherefore God delivered them up in the desires of their hearts to
uncleanness, so that their bodies were dishonored among no them;
25 and these exchanged the truth of God for a lie, and worshipped
and served the creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for
ever: Amen.
26 For this reason God delivered them up to dishonorable passions;
for their females exchanged the natural use for that against nature,
27 and in like manner also the males, leaving the natural use of the
female, were inflamed in their lust one for another, males with males
working the indecency, and receiving in themselves the due reward
of their error.
28 And as they did not approve of holding God in their knowledge,
God delivered them up to a mind incapable of approving, that they
might do things unbecoming,
29 having been filled with all unrighteousness, wickedness malice,
covetousness; full of envy murder, strife, deceit, malignity
30 whisperers, backbiters, haters of God, insolent, haughty, boasters:
inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents,
31 without understanding, covenant-breakers, without natural
affection, unmerciful:
32 who, acknowledging the just decree of God, that those who
practice such things are worthy of death, not only do them, but
approve those that practice them.
Romans 2
1 Wherefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whoever thou art that
judges! For in what thou judgest the other, thou condemnest thyself;
for thou that judgest doest the same things.
2 For we know that the judgment of God is according to truth,
against those that practice such things.272
Codex Sinaiticus:
3 But thinkest thou this, O man that judgest those who practice such
things, and doest the same, that thou shalt escape the judgment of
God?
4 Or dost thou despise the riches of his goodness and forbearance
and longsuffering, not understanding that the goodness of God leads
thee to repentance?
5 But, according to thy hardness and impenitent heart, thou dost
treasure up for thyself wrath in a day of wrath and revelation of the
righteous judgment of God,
6 who will render to each one according to his works;
7 to those that, by perseverance in good work, seek for glory and
honor and incorruptibility, eternal life;
8 but to those that are of party-spirit, and obey not the truth, but
obey unrighteousness, wrath and indignation shall be rendered.
9 Affliction and anguish shall be on every soul of man that works out
that which is evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Greek;
10 but glory and honor and peace to every one that works that which
is good, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.
11 For there is no acceptance of persons with God.
12 For as many as sinned without law shall also perish without law;
and as many as sinned under the law shall be judged by the law;
13 for not the hearers of law are righteous before God, but the doers
of law shall be declared righteous.
14 For whenever Gentiles, that have no law, do by nature the things
of the law, these, not having law, are a law to themselves:
15 who show the work of the law written in their hearts, their
conscience also bearing testimony, and their reasonings between one
another bringing accusation, or also making excuse
16 in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men through Jesus
Christ according to my gospel.
17 But if thou art named Jew, and restest on the law, and makest thy
boast in God,
18 and knowest his will, and provest things that differ, being
instructed out of the law;
19 and art confident that thou thyself art a guide of the blind, a light
to those that are in darkness,
20 an instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes, having the form of
knowledge and of truth in the law:
21 thou, then, that teachest another, teachest not thou thyself? Thou
that preachest that men should not steal, dost thou steal?
22 Thou that sayest that men should not commit adultery, dost thou
commit adultery? Thou that abhorrest idols, dost thou rob temples?
23 Thou that makest thy boast in the law, through transgression of
the law dishonorest thou God?The H. T. Anderson New Testament
273
24 For the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles because
of you, as it is written.
25 For circumcision indeed profits if thou keep the law; but if thou be
a transgressor of law, thy circumcision has become uncircumcision.
26 If, then, the uncircumcision keep the judgments of the law, shall
not his uncircumcision be counted for circumcision?
27 And that which is by birth uncircumcision, if it keep the law, will
judge thee, who with letter and circumcision art a transgressor of
law.
28 For he is not a Jew that is one outwardly, neither is that
circumcision which is outward in the flesh;
29 but he is a Jew who is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of
the heart, in spirit, not in letter, whose praise is not of men, but of
God.
Romans 3
1 What, then, the pre-eminence of the Jew, or what the profit of
circumcision?
2 Much in every way. First, indeed, that they were intrusted with the
oracles of God.
3 What then? if some were unfaithful, will their unfaithfulness make
null the faithfulness of God?
4 Let it not be; but let God become true, but every man a liar, as it is
written: That thou mayest be declared just in thy words and mayest
overcome when thou art judged.
5 But if our unrighteousness renders God’s righteousness
conspicuous, what shall we say? Is God unrighteous who brings on us
the punishment? I speak as a man.
6 Let it not be; since how shall God judge the world?
7 For if the truth of God has, through my lie, become more abundant
for his glory, why am I also still judged as a sinner?
8 And why not say (as we are blasphemously reported, and as some
affirm that we do say): Let us do the evil, that the good may come?
whose condemnation is just.
9 What then? Do we excel? Not at all; for we have before accused
both Jews and Greeks all of being under sin,
10 as it is written: There is none righteous, no, not one;
11 there is none that understands, there is none that seeks after God:
12 they have all gone out of the way, they have together become
unprofitable: there is none that does good, there is not even one.
13 Their throat is an open sepulcher; with their tongues they have
used deceit, the poison of asps is under their lips.
14 Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness.274
Codex Sinaiticus:
15 Swift are their feet to shed blood,
16 destruction and misery are in their ways,
17 and the way of peace have they not known.
18 There is no fear of God before their eyes.
19 But we know that whatever things the law says, it speaks to those
under the law, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world
become guilty before God.
20 Because by works of law shall no flesh be declared righteous in his
sight; for through law is the knowledge of sin.
21 But now without law the righteousness of God has been made
manifest, being witnessed by the law and the prophets:
22 I say, the righteousness of God, through faith in Jesus Christ, to
all that believe. For there is no difference;
23 for all sinned and do come short of the glory of God,
24 being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is
in Christ Jesus,
25 whom God set forth as a propitiatory sacrifice through faith in his
blood, for a manifestation of his righteousness, because of the
passing by of past sins
26 in the forbearance of God, with a view to the manifestation of his
righteousness in the present time, in order that he might be
righteous, and declare righteous him that is of the faith of Jesus.
27 Where, then, is the boasting? It is excluded. Through what law? Of
works? No; but through the law of faith.
28 We conclude, then, that a man is declared righteous by faith,
without works of law.
29 Is he the God of the Jews only? Is he not also of the Gentiles? Yes,
of the Gentiles also.
30 Seeing there is one God who will declare the circumcision
righteous by faith and the uncircumcision through the faith.
31 Do we, then, make law void through faith? Let it not be: on the
other hand, we establish law.
Romans 4
1 What, then, shall we say that Abraham, our forefather, has found
according to the flesh?
2 For, if Abraham was justified by works, he has cause for boasting,
but not before God.
3 For what says the Scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was
counted to him for righteousness.
4 But to him that works, the reward is not counted as a favor, but as a
debt:The H. T. Anderson New Testament
275
5 to him, however, that works not, but believes on him that justifies
the ungodly man, his faith is counted for righteousness.
6 Even as David also speaks of the blessedness of the man to whom
God counts righteousness without works:
7 Blessed are they whose transgressions are forgiven, and whose sins
are covered:
8 blessed is the man whose sin the Lord will not count.
9 Is this blessedness, then, upon the circumcision only, or also upon
the uncircumcision? For we say: Faith was counted to Abraham for
righteousness.
10 How, then, was it counted? While he was in circumcision, or in
uncircumcision? Not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision.
11 And he received a sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness
of the faith which he had while in uncircumcision, that he might be
the father of all that believe while yet in uncircumcision, that
righteousness might be counted to them,
12 and the father of circumcision to them that are not of the
circumcision only, but that also walk in the steps of the faith of our
father Abraham, which he had while in uncircumcision.
13 For not through law was the promise to Abraham, or to his
posterity, that he should be heir of the world, but through the
righteousness of faith.
14 For if they that are of law are heirs, faith is made void, and the
promise is rendered powerless;
15 for the law works wrath; for where no law is, neither is there
transgression.
16 Therefore it is of faith, that it might be according to grace, in order
that the promise may be sure to all the posterity; not to that of the
law only, but also to that of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of
us all.
17 As it is written: A father of many nations have I made thee before
him whom he believed, even God, who makes the dead alive and calls
things that are not as if they are:
18 who against hope on hope believed, in order that he might become
a father of many nations, according to that which was spoken: So
shall thy posterity be;
19 and not being weak in faith, he considered his own body that had
become dead, being about a hundred years old and the deadness of
Sarah’s womb;
20 but in regard to the promise of God he doubted not through
unbelief, but grew strong in faith, giving glory to God,
21 and being fully persuaded that what he had promised he was able
also to perform.
22 Wherefore also it was counted to him for righteousness.276
Codex Sinaiticus:
23 It was not written, however, for his sake, only that it was counted
to him,
24 but also for the sake of us. to whom it shall be counted if we
believe on him that raised Jesus our Lord from the dead,
25 who was delivered up because of our offenses, and raised because
of our justification.
Romans 5
1 Therefore, being justified by faith, we have peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ,
2 through whom, also, we have had the access, by faith, into this
grace in which we stand, and we boast in hope of the glory of God.
3 And not only so, but we also boast in afflictions, knowing that
affliction works endurance,
4 and endurance approval, and approval, hope;
5 and hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God has been
poured out in our hearts through the Holy Spirit that was given to us.
6 Furthermore, we being yet without strength, at the proper time
Christ died for the ungodly.
7 For scarcely for a righteous man will one die; though for the good
man perhaps some one would even dare to die;
8 but God renders his love for us conspicuous in this, that, we being
yet sinners, Christ died for us.
9 Much more, then, being now justified in his blood, we shall be
saved through him from the wrath.
10 For if being enemies we were reconciled to God through the death
of his Son, much more having been reconciled we shall be saved in
his life;
11 and not only so, but also glorying in God through our Lord Jesus
Christ, through whom we have now received the reconciliation.
12 Therefore, as through one man sin entered into the world, and
through sin death, and so death passed through upon all men,
inasmuch as all sinned;
13 for till the law sin was in the world, but sin is not imputed where
there is no law;
14 yet, death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over those that did
not sin after the likeness of the transgression of Adam, who is a type
of the coming one.
15 Yet, not as the offense, so also the gracious gift; for if through the
offense of the one the many died, much more did the grace of God
and the gift in the grace of the one man, Jesus Christ, abound to the
many.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
277
16 And not as through one that sinned is the gift; for the judgment
passed from one offense to condemnation, but the gracious gift from
many offenses to the righteous decree.
17 For if, in the offense of one, death reigned through the one, much
more shall they that receive the abundance of grace and of the gift of
righteousness reign in life through the one, Jesus Christ.
18 Therefore, as through one offense judgment came upon all men to
condemnation, so also through one righteous deed, judgment came
upon all men to justification of life.
19 For as through the disobedience of the one man the many were
constituted sinners, so also through the obedience of the one shall
the many be constituted righteous.
20 But law came in beside, that the offense might abound; but where
sin abounded, grace exceedingly abounded,
21 that, as sin reigned in death, so also grace might reign through
righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Romans 6
1 What, then, shall we say? Let us continue in sin, that grace may
abound?
2 Let it not be. How shall we that died to sin live any longer in it?
3 Know you not that as many of us as were baptized into Christ
Jesus, were baptized into his death?
4 We were, therefore, buried with him through baptism into death,
that as Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the
Father, so we, also, might walk in newness of life.
5 For if we have grown together with the likeness of his death, we
shall grow together also with the likeness of his resurrection,
6 knowing this, that our old man was crucified with him, that the
body of sin might be made powerless, that we should no longer serve
sin;
7 for he that has died has been acquitted of sin.
8 But if we died with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with
him,
9 knowing that Christ, having been raised from the dead, dies no
more: death no longer has dominion over him.
10 For in that he died, to sin he died once for all; but in that he lives,
he lives to God.
11 Thus do you also count yourselves dead indeed to sin, but living to
God in Christ Jesus.
12 Therefore let not sin reign in your mortal body, in order to obey its
desires;278
Codex Sinaiticus:
13 neither present your members as instruments of unrighteousness
to sin, but present yourselves to God as being alive from the dead,
and your members as instruments of righteousness to God.
14 For sin shall not have dominion over you; for you are not under
law, but under grace.
15 What then? shall we sin because we are not under law, but under
grace? Let it not be.
16 Know you not that to whom you present yourselves servants for
obedience, his servants you are whom you obey, either of sin to
death, or of obedience to righteousness?
17 But thanks to God that you were servants of sin, but you obeyed
from the heart the form of teaching into which you were delivered,
18 and having been made free from sin, you became servants to
righteousness.
19 I speak as a man, because of the weakness of your flesh. For as you
present your members servants to uncleanness and to lawlessness in
order to lawlessness, so now present your members servants to
righteousness in order to sanctification.
20 For when you were servants of sin you were free in respect to
righteousness.
21 What fruit, therefore, had you then? Of which things you are now
ashamed; for the end of those things is death.
22 But now, having been made free from sin, and having become
servants to God, you have your fruit to sanctification, and the end,
life eternal.
23 For the wages of sin is death; but the gracious gift of God is life
eternal in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Romans 7
1 Know you not, brethren, for I speak to those that know law, that the
law has dominion over the man as long as he lives?
2 For the married woman is bound by the law to the living husband;
but if the husband shall have died, she is loosed from the law of the
husband.
3 So then, if, while her husband lives, she be married to another man,
she shall be called an adulteress; but if her husband shall have died,
she is free from his law, so that she is not an adulteress, though she
be married to another man.
4 So then, my brethren, you also became dead to the law through the
body of Christ, in order that you should be married to another, him
that was raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit to
God.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
279
5 For when we were in the flesh, the passions of sins which were
through the law wrought in our members to bring forth fruit to
death;
6 but now we have been delivered from the law, having died to that in
which we were held, so that we serve in newness of spirit and not in
oldness of letter.
7 What, then, shall we say? Is the law sin? Let it not be; but I had not
known sin except through law; for I had not known desire unless the
law had said: Thou shalt not desire.
8 But sin, taking occasion, through the commandment wrought in
me all manner of desire; for without law sin is dead.
9 Now, I was alive without law once; but when the commandment
came, sin became alive,
10 and I died; and the commandment which was for life, this was
found by me to be for death.
11 For sin, taking occasion, through the commandment deceived me,
and through it slew me.
12 So, then, the law is holy, and the commandment holy and just and
good.
13 Did, then, that which is good become death to me? Let it not be;
but sin, that it might appear sin, working out death to me through
that which is good, that sin through the commandment might
become exceedingly sinful.
14 For we know that the law is spiritual: but I am flesh, sold under
sin.
15 For what I work I know not; for I practice not what I wish, but
what I hate this I do.
16 But if I do this that I wish not, I agree with the law that it is good;
17 and now I no longer do it, but sin that dwells in me.
18 For I know that there dwells in me, that is, in my flesh, no good.
For to will is present with me, but to work out the beautiful, not;
19 for the good that I wish I do not, but the evil that I hate, this I
practice.
20 But if I do this that I wish not, I no longer do it, but sin that dwells
in me.
21 I find, then, the law, to me wishing to do the good, —That evil is
present with me;
22 for I delight in the law of God according to the inward man,
23 but I see a different law in my members warring against the law of
my mind, and making me a captive in the law of sin that is in my
members.
24 Wretched man that I am: who shall deliver me from the body of
this death?280
Codex Sinaiticus:
25 Thanks to God, through Jesus Christ our Lord: so, then, I myself
with the mind indeed serve the law of God, but with the flesh the law
of sin.
Romans 8
1 There is, therefore, now no condemnation to those who are in
Christ Jesus.
2 For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus made thee free from
the law of sin and of death.
3 For what the law could not do, because it was weak through the
flesh, God, sending his own Son in the likeness of the flesh of sin, and
on account of sin, condemned sin in the flesh,
4 that the righteous demand of the law might be fulfilled in us, who
walk not according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit.
5 For those that are according to the flesh mind the things of the
flesh, but those that are according to the Spirit, the things of the
Spirit.
6 For the mind of the flesh is death, but the mind of the Spirit is life
and peace.
7 Because the mind of the flesh is enmity towards God; for it is not
subjected to the law of God, neither indeed can it be.
8 And they that are in the flesh can not please God.
9 You, however, are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the
Spirit of God dwells in you. And if any one has not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his.
10 But if Christ is in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the
spirit is life because of righteousness.
11 And if the Spirit of him who raised Jesus from the dead dwells in
you, he who raised Christ Jesus from the dead will also make your
mortal bodies alive through his Spirit that dwells in you.
12 Therefore, brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, that we
should live according to the flesh.
13 For if you live according to the flesh, you shall die; but if through
the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body, you shall live.
14 For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are sons of God.
15 For you did not receive the spirit of bondage again to fear; but you
received the Spirit of adoption, in which we cry: Abba, Father.
16 The Spirit itself bears testimony with our spirit that we are
children of God.
17 But if children, also heirs: heirs, indeed, of God, but joint-heirs
with Christ, if so be that we suffer with him. that we may also be
glorified with him.
18 For I reckon that the sufferings of the present time are not worthy
to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed for us.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
281
19 For the earnest expectation of the creation awaits the revelation of
the sons of God.
20 For the creation was subjected to vanity, not willingly, but by
reason of him who subjected it,
21 in hope that the creation itself shall be freed from the bondage of
corruption into the liberty of the glory of the children of God.
22 For we know that the whole creation groans together and is in
pain together till now;
23 and not only so, but ourselves also, having the firstfruits of the
Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, awaiting the
adoption, the redemption of our body.
24 For by hope were we saved; but hope seen is not hope; for what
any one sees, why does he also hope for it?
25 But if we hope for that which we see not, we with patience wait for
it.
26 And in like manner the Spirit also helps our weakness. For we
know not what we shall pray for as we ought, but the Spirit itself
intercedes with groanings unutterable:
27 he, however, who searches the hearts knows what is the mind of
the Spirit, that he intercedes for the saints according to the will of
God.
28 But we know that to those who love God all things work together
for good, to those who are called according to his purpose.
29 For whom he foreknew, he also predestinated to be conformed to
the image of his Son, that he might be firstborn among many
brethren;
30 and whom he predestinated, these he also called; and whom he
called, these he also declared righteous; and whom he declared
righteous, these he also made glorious.*
* By conferring on them the doxa—glory of the New
Covenant.
31 What shall we then say to these things? If God is for us, who is
against us?
32 He indeed that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for
us all, how will he not also with him freely give us all things?
33 Who shall bring a charge against God’s elect? It is God who
justifies.
34 Who is he that condemns? It is Christ Jesus who died; yes, more,
who has risen, who is at the right hand of God; who also intercedes
for us.
35 Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall affliction, or
distress, or persecution, or hunger, or nakedness, or danger, or the
sword?282
Codex Sinaiticus:
36 as it is written: For thy sake we are killed all the day; we are
counted as; sheep for slaughter.
37 But in all these things we do more than conquer through him that
loved us.
38 For I am persuaded that neither death nor life, nor angels nor
principalities, nor things present nor things to come, nor powers
39 nor height nor depth, nor any other created thing, shall be able to
separate us from the love of God that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Romans 9
1 I speak the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience bearing me
testimony in the Holy Spirit,
2 that I have great grief and unceasing sorrow in my heart.
3 For I could wish that I myself were accursed from Christ for my
brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh,
4 who are Israelites, to whom belong the adoption, and the glory, and
the covenants, and the giving of the law, and the religious service,
and the promises;
5 whose are the fathers, and from whom is Christ according to the
flesh: who is over all, God blessed for ever, Amen.
6 But I do not say such a thing as: The word of God has failed. For
these are not all Israel, who are of Israel;
7 neither, because they are the posterity of Abraham, are all children;
but; In Isaac shall thy posterity be called:
8 that is, the children of the flesh, these are not the children of God,
but the children of the promise are counted as the posterity.
9 For the word of promise was this: According to this season will I
come, and Sarah shall have a son.
10 And not only this, but also Rebecca, having conceived by one, our
father Isaac, —
11 for the children not yet having been born, neither having done any
good or ill, that the purpose of God according to election might
stand, not of works, but of him that calls, —
12 it was said to her: The elder shall serve the younger,
13 as it is written: Jacob I loved, but Esau I hated.
14 What, then, shall we say? Is there unrighteousness with God? Let
it not be.
15 For he says to Moses: I will have mercy on whom I have mercy,
and I will have compassion on whom I have compassion.
16 So, then, not of him that wills nor of him that runs, but of God
who has mercy.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
283
17 For the Scripture says to Pharaoh: For this same purpose did I
raise thee up, that I might show in thee my power, and that my name
might be published in all the earth.
18 Therefore, on whom he wills he has mercy, and whom he wills he
hardens.
19 Thou wilt say to me therefore: Why does he yet find fault? For who
has resisted his will?
20 Yes, rather, O man, who art thou that replies against God? Shall
the thing moulded say to him that moulded it: Why didst thou make
me thus?
21 Has not the potter right over the clay to make of the same lump
one vessel for honor and another for dishonor?
22 But if God—willing to show his wrath, and to make known his
power, endured in much longsuffering vessels of wrath fitted for
destruction,
23 also that he might make known the riches of his glory on vessels
of mercy, which he before prepared for glory?
24 whom he also called, us not only from among the Jews, but also
from among the Gentiles,
25 as he also says in Hosea: I will call that my people which was not
my people, and her beloved, that was not beloved;
26 and it shall come to pass in the place where it was said to them:
You are not my people, there shall they be called sons of the living
God.
27 But Isaiah cries concerning Israel: Though the number of the sons
of Israel be as the sand of the sea, the remnant shall be saved.
28 For a fulfilling and cutting short of the word will the Lord make
on the earth.
29 And as Isaiah predicted: Unless the Lord of Sabaoth had left us
posterity, we had become as Sodom and had been made like
Gomorrah.
30 What, then, shall we say? that the Gentiles, that were not
following after righteousness, attained to righteousness, the
righteousness that is of faith;
31 but Israel, following after a law of righteousness, did not attain to
a law.
32 Why? because they sought it not by faith, but as by works: for they
stumbled at the stone of stumbling,
33 as it is written: Behold, I lay in Zion a stone of stumbling and a
rock of offense; and he that believes on him shall not be ashamed.
Romans 10
1 Brethren, the good pleasure of my heart, and my prayer to God for
them, is for their salvation;284
Codex Sinaiticus:
2 For I bear them testimony that they have a zeal for God, but not
according to knowledge.
3 For, being ignorant of God’s righteousness, and seeking to establish
their own righteousness, they have not submitted themselves to the
righteousness of God.
4 For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that
believes.
5 For Moses writes that the man that does the righteousness of the
law shall live in it.
6 But the righteousness that is of faith speaks thus: Say not in thy
heart: Who shall ascend into heaven? that is, to bring Christ down:
7 or, Who shall descend into the abyss? that is, to bring Christ up
from the dead.
8 But what says it? The word is near thee, in thy mouth and in thy
heart: that is, the word of faith which we preach.
9 Because, if thou shalt confess with thy mouth that Jesus is Lord,
and shalt believe in thy heart that God raised him from the dead,
thou shalt be saved;
10 for with the heart faith is exercised in order to righteousness, and
with the mouth confession is made in order to salvation.
11 For the Scripture says: Whoever believes on him shall not be
ashamed.
12 For there is no difference between Jew and Greek; for the same is
Lord of all, rich toward all that call upon him.
13 For every one that calls on the name of the Lord shall be saved.
14 How, then, shall they call on him in whom they have not believed?
And how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? And
how shall they hear without a preacher?
15 And how shall they preach unless they be sent? As it is written:
How beautiful are the feet of them that bring glad tidings of good
things.
16 But they have not all obeyed the gospel. For Isaiah says: Lord, who
has believed that which was heard by us?
17 So, then, faith comes from what is heard, and that which is heard
comes through the word of God.
18 But I say, have they not heard? Yes, verily, Their sound went forth
into all the earth, and their words to the end of the world.
19 But I say, did not Israel know? First Moses says: I will provoke you
to jealousy by that which is no nation, by a foolish nation I will excite
you to anger.
20 But Isaiah is very bold, and says: I was found by them that sought
me not, I became manifest to them that asked not after me.
21 But of Israel he says: All day long I stretched forth my hands to a
disobedient and contradicting people.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
285
Romans 11
1 I say, then, Did God cast away his people? It can not be; for I am an
Israelite, of the posterity of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.
2 God did not cast away his people whom he foreknew. Know you not
what the Scripture says in speaking of Elijah, how he complains to
God against Israel?
3 Lord, thy prophets they have killed, thy altars they have dug down,
and I am left the only one, and they seek my life.
4 But what says the answer of God to him? I have reserved for myself
seven thousand men who have not bowed the knee to Baal.
5 So, then, even in the present time there is a remnant according to
the election of grace;
6 now if by grace, no longer of works, since grace no longer becomes
grace.
7 What then? That which Israel seeks for, this he did not obtain, but
the election obtained it, and the rest were hardened,
8 as it is written: God gave them a spirit of stupor, eyes that they
should not see, and ears that they should not hear, till this day.
9 And David says: Let their table become a snare, and a trap, and a
stumblingblock, and a recompense to them:
10 let their eyes be darkened, that they may not see, and bow down
their back always.
11 I say, then, did they stumble that they should fall? It can not be;
but by their fall salvation has come to the Gentiles, in order to excite
them to emulation,
12 But if their fall is the riches of the world and their worse estate the
riches of the Gentiles, how much more their fulness.
13 But I speak to you, the Gentiles. Inasmuch as I am the apostle of
the Gentiles, I glorify my office,
14 if in any way I may excite to emulation my own flesh and save
some of them.
15 For, if the casting away of them is the reconciliation of the world,
what shall their reception be but life from the dead?
16 But if the firstfruit is holy, so also the lump; and if the root is holy,
so also the branches.
17 But if some of the branches were broken off, and thou, being a
wild olive, wert grafted in among them, and made a joint-partaker of
the root and the fatness of the olive,
18 boast not against the branches; but if thou boastest, thou bearest
not the root, but the root thee.
19 Thou wilt say then: The branches were broken off that I might be
grafted in.286
Codex Sinaiticus:
20 Well: because of unbelief they were broken off, but thou standest
by faith. Be not highminded, but fear;
21 for if God spared not the natural branches, neither will he spare
thee.
22 Behold, then, the goodness and severity of God: towards those
that fell severity, but towards thee the goodness of God, if thou
continue in his goodness, otherwise thou also shalt be cut off.
23 And these, moreover, if they continue not in unbelief, shall be
grafted in; for God is able to graft them in again.
24 For if thou wert cut out of an olive tree that is wild by nature, and
wert grafted contrary to nature into a good olive tree, how much
more shall these the natural be grafted into their own olive tree.
25 For I do not wish you, brethren, to be ignorant of this mystery,
lest you should be wise in your own conceits, that hardness, in part,
has come upon Israel till the fulness of the Gentiles shall have come
in;
26 and so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written: There shall come
out of Zion the deliverer, he shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob.
27 And this is the covenant which they shall have from me, when I
take away their sins.
28 As to the gospel they are enemies for your sake, but as to the
election they are beloved for the fathers’ sakes:
29 for the gifts and the calling of God are irrevocable.
30 For as you in time past believed not God, but now have obtained
mercy through the unbelief of these,
31 so also have these now believed not, that through your mercy they
also may now obtain mercy;
32 for God has shut up all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon
all.
33 O the depth of the riches and wisdom and knowledge of God: how
unsearchable are his judgments and his ways past finding out.
34 For who has known the mind of the Lord? or who has been his
counsellor?
35 or who has first given to him, and a recompense shall be made
him?
36 For of him, and through him, and for him, are all things: to him
be glory through the ages. Amen.
Romans 12
1 I beseech you therefore, brethren, through the mercies of God, to
present your bodies a sacrifice: living, holy, acceptable to God, which
is your rational service.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
287
2 And be not conformed to this age, but be transformed by the
renewing of your mind, that you may prove what the will of God is,
the good, and acceptable, and perfect.
3 For I say, through the grace that was given to me, to every one that
is among you, that he think not of himself more highly than he ought
to think, but that he think soberly, as God distributed to each a
measure of faith.
4 For as in one body we have many members, but all the members
have not the same office,
5 so we the many are one body in Christ, and every one members one
of another,
6 but having gifts differing according to the grace that was given to
us; whether prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion of
faith;
7 or ministry, let us wait on our ministry; or he that teaches, on his
teaching;
8 or he that exhorts, on his exhortation: he that gives, let him do it
with simplicity: he that rules, with diligence: he that shows mercy,
with cheerfulness.
9 Let love be unfeigned. Abhor that which is evil, cleave to that which
is good:
10 in brotherly love, be affectionate one toward another: in honor,
preferring one another:
11 in diligence, not slothful: in spirit, fervent; serving the Lord;
12 in hope, rejoicing: in affliction, patient: in prayer, persevering;
13 communicating to the necessities of the saints; following
hospitality:
14 bless them that persecute you; bless, and curse not.
15 Rejoice with them that rejoice, weep with them that weep.
16 Be of the same mind one toward another; mind not high things,
but condescend to things that are lowly: be not wise in your own
conceits.
17 Render to no one evil for evil; provide for things honorable in the
sight of all men;
18 if possible, as far as it is of you, be at peace with all men;
19 avenge not yourselves, beloved, but give place to the wrath; for it
is written: Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord.
20 If, then, thy enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink;
for in doing this thou shalt heap coals of fire on his head.
21 Be not overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good.
Romans 13288
Codex Sinaiticus:
1 Let every soul submit himself to the authorities that are over him.
For there is no authority except of God, and those that are have been
appointed by God.
2 So, then, he that sets himself against the authority resists the
appointment of God: and they that resist shall receive to themselves
condemnation.
3 For rulers are not a terror to the good work, but to the evil. And
dost thou desire not to be afraid of the authority? do that which is
good, and thou shalt have praise from the same;
4 for he is the minister of God to thee for good. But if thou do that
which is evil, be afraid; for he wears not the sword in vain; for he is
the minister of God, an avenger to execute wrath on him that
practices that which is evil.
5 Wherefore it is needful that you submit yourselves, not only
because of wrath, but also because of conscience.
6 For, for this reason you pay tribute also; for they are the ministers
of God attending continually to this very thing.
7 Render to all their dues: tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to
whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor.
8 Owe no one any thing, except to love one another; for he that loves
another has fulfilled the law.
9 For this, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not kill, Thou
shalt not steal, Thou shalt not desire, and, if there is any other
commandment, it is briefly summed up in this saying, in this: Thou
shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.
10 Love works no evil to the neighbor: love, therefore, is the
fulfillment of the law.
11 And this, knowing the time, that it is the hour, at which we should
have already awaked out of sleep; for now is our salvation nearer
than when we believed.
12 The night is far spent, the day is at hand. Let us therefore put off
the works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light.
13 Let us walk becomingly as in the day, not in riotings and
drunkenness, not in lewdness and wantonness, not in contention and
envy;
14 but put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the
desires of the flesh.
Romans 14
1 Now, him that is weak in the faith receive, not to judgments of
thoughts.
2 One believes that he may eat all things, another who is weak eats
herbs.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
289
3 Let not him that eats despise him that eats not; and let not him that
eats not judge him that eats; for God has received him.
4 Who art thou that judgest another man’s servant? To his own
master he stands or falls; but he shall stand, for the Lord is able to
make him stand.
5 One esteems one day better than another; another esteems every
day alike: let each one be fully persuaded in his own mind.
6 He that regards the day, to the Lord he regards it. And he that eats,
to the Lord he eats, for he gives thanks to God; and he that eats not,
to the Lord he eats not, and gives thanks to God.
7 For no one of us lives to himself, and no one dies to himself;
8 for if we live, to the Lord we live, and if we die, to the Lord we die.
If, then, we live, and if we die, the Lord’s are we.
9 For, for this purpose Christ died and lived, that he might be Lord
both of the dead and the living.
10 But why judgest thou thy brother? And why dost thou despise thy
brother? For we must all stand before the judgment-seat of God.
11 For it is written: As I live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to
me, and every tongue shall confess to God.
12 So, then, each one of us shall give an account of himself to God.
13 No longer, therefore, let us judge one another; but judge this
rather, to put no stumbling-block or occasion of falling in your
brother’s way.
14 I know and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus that nothing is
unclean of itself, but to him that thinks that anything is unclean, to
him it is unclean.
15 For if on account of meat thy brother is grieved, thou no longer
walkest according to love. Do not by thy meat destroy him for whom
Christ died.
16 Let not, then, your good be evil spoken of.
17 For the kingdom of God is not eating and drinking, but
righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit;
18 for he that in this serves Christ is acceptable to God and approved
by men.
19 So, then, let us pursue the things of peace, and things by which we
may edify one another.
20 Do not for the sake of meat overthrow the work of God. All things,
indeed, are clean; but it is evil for the man that eats so as to give
offense:
21 it is good not to eat flesh, neither to drink wine, nor anything by
which thy brother stumbles.
22 The faith that thou hast, have thou to thyself in the sight of God.
Blessed is he that judges not himself in that which he allows;290
Codex Sinaiticus:
23 he that doubts is condemned if he eat, because he eats not from
faith; and everything that is not from faith is sin.
Romans 15
1 Now we the strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and
not to please ourselves.
2 Let each one of us please his neighbor, for his good with a view to
edification;
3 for Christ pleased not himself, but, as it is written: The reproaches
of them that reproached thee fell on me.
4 For whatever things were formerly written, were written for our
instruction, that we, through the patience and the comfort of the
Scripture, might have hope.
5 Now may the God of patience and of comfort grant to you to be of
the same mind one toward another according to Christ Jesus,
6 that with one mind you may with one mouth glorify the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
7 Wherefore, receive one another, as Christ also received you, to the
glory of God.
8 For I say that Christ became a minister of the circumcision for the
truth of God, that he might confirm the promises made to the
fathers,
9 and that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy, as it is
written: For this cause will I give thanks to thee among the Gentiles,
and to thy name will I sing.
10 And again he says: Rejoice, you Gentiles, with his people.
11 And again: Praise the Lord, all you Gentiles, and applaud him, all
you peoples.
12 And again Isaiah says: There shall be a root of Jesse, and he that
rises to rule the Gentiles; in him shall Gentiles hope.
13 Now may the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in
believing, in order that you may abound in hope in the power of the
Holy Spirit.
14 Now, my brethren, I am persuaded, even I myself, concerning you,
that you also yourselves are full of goodness, having been filled with
all knowledge, able also to admonish one another.
15 I have, however, written more boldly to you, brethren, in some
measure, as putting you in mind because of the grace that is given to
me by God,
16 that I should be a minister of Christ Jesus to the Gentiles,
ministering as a priest in the gospel of God, that the offering of the
Gentiles might become acceptable, being sanctified in the Holy
Spirit.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
291
17 I have, therefore, my boasting in Christ Jesus in things pertaining
to God;
18 for I will not dare to speak of any of the things that Christ did not
work through me for the obedience of the Gentiles, by word and
deed,
19 in the power of signs and wonders, in the power of the Spirit of
God, so that from Jerusalem and round about as far as Illyricum I
have fully preached the gospel of Christ.
20 But so making it a point of honor, I have preached the gospel not
where Christ was named, that I might not build on another’s
foundation,
21 but as it is written: They to whom no message came concerning
him, shall see, and they who have not heard, shall understand.
22 For which cause also I have been hindered many times from
coming to you;
23 but now, no longer having a place in these parts, and having for
many years a strong desire to come to you,
24 whenever I take my journey into Spain; for I hope, in passing
through, to see you, and by you to be sent forward thither, if first I
may be in some measure filled with you.
25 But now I am going to Jerusalem, ministering to the saints.
26 For Macedonia and Achaia have been pleased to make a
contribution for the poor of the saints that are in Jerusalem.
27 For they have been pleased, and their debtors they are; for if the
Gentiles have shared in their spiritual things, they ought also to
minister to them in carnal things.
28 Having, therefore, performed this, and having secured to them
this fruit, I will return through you into Spain;
29 but I know that in coming to you I shall come in the fulness of the
blessing of Christ.
30 But I beseech you, brethren, through our Lord Jesus Christ, and
through the love of the Spirit, that you strive together with me in
prayers to God for me,
31 that I may be delivered from the disobedient in Judea, and that
my service which is for Jerusalem may be acceptable to the saints,
32 that, coming to you, in joy through the will of God, I may with you
be refreshed.
33 The God of peace be with you all. Amen.
Romans 16
1 I commend to you Phebe, our sister, who is a deaconess of the
church that is in Cenchrea,292
Codex Sinaiticus:
2 that you receive her in the Lord in a manner worthy of saints, and
that you aid her in whatever matter she may have need of you; for
she has been a helper of many, of myself also.
3 Salute Prisca and Aquila, my fellow-laborers in Christ Jesus,
4 who for my life laid down their own necks, to whom not I only give
thanks, but all the churches of the Gentiles:
5 salute also the church that is in their house. Salute Epenetus, my
beloved, who is the firstfruits of Asia to Christ.
6 Salute Mary, who labored much for us.
7 Salute Andronicus and Junias, my kinsmen and my fellow-
prisoners, who are well known among the apostles, who also were in
Christ before me.
8 Salute Amplias, my beloved in the Lord.
9 Salute Urbanus, my fellow-laborer in Christ, and Stachys, my
beloved.
10 Salute Apelles, approved in Christ. Salute those who are of the
household of Aristobulus.
11 Salute Herodion my kinsman. Salute those who are of the
household of Narcissus, who are in the Lord.
12 Salute Tryphsena and Tryphosa, who labored in the Lord. Salute
Persis the beloved, who labored much in the Lord.
13 Salute Rufus, the chosen in the Lord, and his mother and mine.
14 Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas, and the
brethren that are with them.
15 Salute Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas,
and all the saints that are with them.
16 Salute one another with a holy kiss. All the churches of Christ
salute you.
17 Now I beseech you, brethren, to mark those that cause divisions
and offenses contrary to the teaching that you learned, and turn away
from them;
18 for such serve not our Lord Christ, but their own belly, and
through good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the
simple.
19 For your obedience has come abroad to all; I therefore rejoice over
you: I desire, however, that you be wise in regard to that which is
good, but harmless in regard to that which is evil.
20 And the God of peace will bruise Satan under your feet shortly.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
21 Timothy my fellow-laborer salutes you: Lucius also, and Jason,
and Sosipater, my kinsman.
22 I Tertius, who wrote the letter, salute you in the Lord.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
293
23 Gaius my host, and the host of the whole church, salutes you.
Erastus, the treasurer of the city, salutes you; and Quartus, our
brother.
25 Now to him who is able to establish you according to my gospel
and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the
mystery that was kept in silence during eternal times,
26 but is now made manifest, and through the Scriptures of the
prophets, according to the commandment of the eternal God, made
known for obedience of faith among all nations,
27 to the only wise God, through Jesus Christ: to whom be glory
through the ages. Amen.294
Codex Sinaiticus:
Paul to the Corinthians 1
1 Corinthians 1
1 Paul, a called apostle of Christ Jesus through the will of God, and
Sosthenes
my
brother,
2 to the church of God that is in Corinth, to the sanctified in Christ
Jesus, called saints, with all that call on the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ in every place, both theirs and ours:
3 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and our Lord Jesus
Christ.
4 I thank my God always on your account for the grace of God that
was given to you in Christ Jesus,
5 that in everything you were enriched in him, in all utterance and all
knowledge,
6 inasmuch as the testimony of Christ was confirmed in you,
7 so that you come behind in no gift, waiting for the revelation of our
Lord Jesus Christ,
8 who will also confirm you to the end that you may be blameless in
the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
9 God is faithful through whom you were called into the fellowship of
his Son, Jesus Christ our Lord.
10 But I exhort you, brethren, through the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that you all speak the same thing; and that there be no
schisms among you; but that you be perfectly joined together in the
same mind and in the same judgment.
11 For it has been declared to me concerning you, my brethren, by
those of Chloe, that there are contentions among you.
12 And I say this, that each of you says: I am of Paul, and, I of
Apollos, and, I of Cephas, and, I of Christ.
13 Is Christ divided? Was Paul crucified for you, or were you baptized
into the name of Paul?
14 I thank God that I baptized no one of you except Crispus and
Gaius:
15 that no one might say that you were baptized into my name.
16 And I baptized also the household of Stephanas: besides I know
not whether I baptized any other.
17 For Christ did not send me to baptize, but to preach the gospel,
not in wisdom of speech, lest the cross of Christ should be made of no
effect.
18 For the preaching of the cross is to those that perish foolishness,
but to those that are saved it is the power of God.
19 For it is written: I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and I will
set aside the prudence of the prudent.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
295
20 Where is the wise man? Where is the scribe? Where is the
disputer of this age? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of the
world?
21 For since, in the wisdom of God, the world, through wisdom, knew
not God, it pleased God through the foolishness of what is preached,
to save those that believe:
22 since Jews ask for signs, and Greeks seek for wisdom,
23 we, however, preach Christ crucified, to Jews indeed a stumbling-
block, and to Gentiles foolishness,
24 but to these the called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ God’s power
and God’s wisdom;
25 because the foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the
weakness of God is stronger than men.
26 For see your calling, brethren, that not many wise men according
to the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble;
27 but the foolish things of the world has God chosen, that he may
shame the wise, and the weak things of the world has God chosen,
that he may shame the strong,
28 and the ignoble things of the world and things that are despised
has God chosen, things that are not, that he may bring to nought
things that are,
29 to the end that no flesh should glory in the sight of God.
30 But of him are you in Christ Jesus, who has become to us wisdom
from God, righteousness also, and sanctification, and redemption,
31 that as it is written: He that glories, in the Lord let him glory.
1 Corinthians 2
1 And I, brethren, on coming to you, came not according to
excellence of speech or of wisdom, announcing to you the testimony
of God.
2 For I determined not to know anything among you except Jesus
Christ and him crucified.
3 And I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in great
trembling;
4 and my speech and what I preached was not in persuasive words of
wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power:
5 that your faith might not be in the wisdom of men, but in the power
of God.
6 Wisdom, however, we do speak among the perfect, yet wisdom not
of this age, nor of the rulers of this; age who are brought to naught;
7 but we speak God’s wisdom in a mystery, the hidden which God
ordained before the ages for our glory;296
Codex Sinaiticus:
8 which no one of the rulers of this age knew; for had they known it,
they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.
9 But as it is written: Which things eye has not seen, and ear has not
heard, and into the heart of man have not entered, as many as God
has prepared for those that love him.
10 For to us has God revealed them through his Spirit. For the Spirit
searches all things, even the depths of God.
11 For what one of men knows the thoughts of man but the spirit of
man which is in him? So also the thoughts of God has no one known
but the Spirit of God.
12 But we have received not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit that
is from God, that we may know the things that are freely given to us
by God;
13 which things we also speak not in words taught by human
wisdom, but in words taught by the Spirit explaining spiritual things
to spiritual men.
14 But the psychical* man receives not the things of the Spirit of God;
for they are foolishness to him, and he is not able to know them,
because they are spiritually discerned.
*psychical = we would say the “soulish man.” ed.
15 But the spiritual man discerns all things; he himself, however, is
discerned by no one.
16 For who has known the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct
him? But we have the mind of Christ.
1 Corinthians 3
1 And I, brethren, was not able to speak to you as to spiritual, but as
to flesh, as to babes in Christ.
2 I fed you with milk, not with meat; for you were not yet able. No,
not even yet now are you able;
3 for you are yet carnal. For whereas there is among you envy and
strife, are you not carnal, and do you not walk according to man?
4 For when one says: I am of Paul; and another: I of Apollos, are you
not men?
5 Who, then, is Apollos? and who is Paul? Ministers through whom
you believed, even as the Lord gave to each one.
5 I planted, Apollos watered, but God made to grow:
6 [no verse]
7 so, then, neither is he that plants anything, nor he that waters, but
he that makes to grow, who is God.
8 Now, he that plants and he that waters are one, but each shall
receive his own reward according to his own labor.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
297
9 For we are God’s fellow-laborers: God’s field. God’s building are
you.
10 According to the grace of God that is given to me, as a wise
architect I have laid the foundation, and another builds upon it. But
let each one take heed how he builds upon it.
11 For other foundation no one can lay beside that which is laid,
which is Christ Jesus.
12 Now, if any one builds on this foundation gold, silver, precious
stones, wood, hay, stubble;
13 each man’s work shall become manifest; for the day shall make it
known, because it is revealed in fire; and each one’s work, what kind
it is, the fire itself shall prove.
14 If any one’s work shall abide, which he has built on this, he shall
receive a reward:
15 if any one’s work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss, but himself
shall be saved, so, however, as through fire.
16 Know you not that you are the temple of God, and the Spirit of
God dwells in you?
17 If any one destroys the temple of God, him shall God destroy; for
the temple of God is holy, and such are you.
18 Let no one deceive himself: if any one seems to be wise among you
in this age, let him become a fool, that he may become wise.
19 For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. For it is
written: He takes the wise in their own craftiness.
20 And again: The Lord knows the thoughts of the wise, that they are
vain.
21 So, then, let no one glory in men; for all things are yours;
22 whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death,
or things present, or things to come, all are yours,
23 and you are Christ’s, and Christ is God’s.
1 Corinthians 4
1 So let a man regard us as ministers of Christ, and stewards of the
mysteries of God.
2 Here, moreover, it is required in stewards that one be found
faithful.
3 But to me it is the very least thing that I be judged by you or by
human judgments; yes, I judge not even myself;
4 for I am conscious of no wrong, yet not in this am I justified: but he
that judges me is the Lord.
5 So, then, judge nothing before the time, till the Lord come, who will
also bring to light the secret things of darkness, and will make298
Codex Sinaiticus:
manifest the counsels of the hearts; and then shall each one have his
praise from God.
6 And these things, brethren, I have transferred in figure to myself
and Apollos for your sakes, that in us you may learn “Think not above
what things are written,” that you be not puffed up one for one
against another.
7 For who makes thee to differ? and what hast thou that thou didst
not receive? and, if thou really didst receive, why dost thou boast as if
not having received?
8 Already are you full: already are you rich: without us have you
reigned as kings; and I would indeed that you did reign, that we also
might reign with you.
9 For, I think, God has set forth us the apostles last, as appointed to
death; for we have become a spectacle to the world, both to angels
and men.
10 We, fools for Christ’s sake, but you, wise in Christ; we, weak, but
you, strong; you, honored, but we, dishonored.
11 Till this present hour we both hunger and thirst, and are poorly
clad, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling-place,
12 and labor, working with our own hands: being reviled, we bless;
being persecuted, we endure;
13 being defamed, we entreat: as the refuse of the world have we
become, of all things the offscouring till this day.
14 Not to shame you do I write these things, but as my beloved
children I admonish you.
15 For, though you have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet not
many fathers; for in Christ Jesus I begot you through the gospel.
16 I beseech you, therefore, become imitators of me.
17 For this cause have I sent to you Timothy, who is my son, beloved
and faithful in the Lord, who will remind you of my ways that are in
Christ, as I teach everywhere in every church.
18 Now some have been puffed up as if I were not coming to you:
19 but I will come to you quickly, if the Lord will: and I will know not
the speech of those that are puffed up, but the power;
20 for the kingdom of God is not in speech, but in power.
21 What will you? With a rod shall I come to you, or in love, also in
the spirit of meekness?
1 Corinthians 5
1 Lewdness is commonly heard of as being among you, and such
lewdness as is not even among the Gentiles, that one has his father’s
wife.
2 And are you puffed up, and did you not rather mourn, that he that
has done this deed might be taken from among you?The H. T. Anderson New Testament
299
3 For I indeed, as absent in body but present in spirit, have already
judged, as if I were present, him that has so perpetrated this thing:
4 in the name of our Lord Jesus, when you have come together, and
my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus,
5 to deliver such a one to Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that
the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord.
6 The ground of your glorying is not good. Know you not that a little
leaven leavens the whole mass?
7 Cleanse out the old leaven, that you may be a fresh lump, as you are
unleavened; for our passover also has been sacrificed for us -Christ.
8 So, then, let us keep the feast, not with old leaven, neither with the
leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of
sincerity and truth.
9 I wrote to you in the letter not to keep company with lewd persons,
10 not altogether with the lewd persons of this world, or with the
covetous and extortioners, or idolaters, for then you ought to have
gone out of the world.
11 But now I wrote to you not to keep company, if any one called
brother be a lewd person, or covetous, or an idolater, or a reviler, or a
drunkard, or an extortioner, with such a one not even to eat.
12 For what have I to do to judge those also without? Do you not
judge those within?
13 But those without God judges. Put away from among yourselves
the wicked man.
1 Corinthians 6
1 Dare any one of you, having a matter against another, go to law
before the unjust and not before the saints?
2 Or know you not that the saints shall judge the world? and if
among you the world is judged, are you unworthy of the smallest
judgments?
3 Know you not that we shall judge angels? much more then things
pertaining to this life.
4 If you have, then, judgments pertaining to this life, those who are
esteemed as nothing in the church, these do you set up?
5 For shame to you do I speak. So, is there not among you a wise
man, not even one, who shall be able to arbitrate between his
brethren?
6 But brother goes to law with brother, and this, too, before
unbelievers?
7 Now, assuredly there is wholly a loss to you, that you have lawsuits
with yourselves. Why do you not rather take injustice? Why do you
not rather suffer yourselves to be defrauded?
8 But you do injustice, and defraud, and this to brethren.300
Codex Sinaiticus:
9 Or know you not that the unrighteous shall not inherit God’s
kingdom? Be not deceived: neither lewd persons, nor idolaters, nor
adulterers, nor catamites, nor sodomites.
10 nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor
extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God.
11 And these things were some of you; but you were washed, but you
were sanctified, but you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus,
and in the Spirit of our God.
12 All things are in my power, but not all things are profitable: all
things are in my power, but I will not be brought under the power of
any.
13 Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats; but God will destroy
both it and them. But the body is not for lewdness, but for the Lord,
and the Lord for the body;
14 and God both raised up the Lord, and will raise us up through his
power.
15 Know you not that your bodies are the members of Christ? Shall I,
then, take the members of Christ and make them the members of a
harlot? Let it not be.
16 Know you not that he that is joined to a harlot is one body? For
the two, says he, shall be one flesh.
17 But he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit.
18 Flee from lewdness. Every sin whatever a man might commit is
without the body; but he that commits lewdness sins against his own
body.
19 Or know you not that your bodies are the temple of the Holy Spirit
which is in you, which you have from God, and you are not your
own? for you were bought with a price: now, then, glorify God in your
body.
1 Corinthians 7
1 But concerning the things of which you wrote, it is good for a man
not to touch a woman;
2 yet, on account of lewdness, let each one have his own wife, and let
each woman have her own husband.
3 Let the husband render to the wife the duty, and in like manner
also the wife to the husband.
4 The wife has not power over her own body, but the husband; and in
like manner also the husband has not power over his own body, but
the wife.
5 Debar not one another, unless perhaps by consent for a time, that
you may give yourselves to prayer; and be together again, lest Satan
tempt you on account of your incontinency.
6 But this I speak as a permission, not as a commandment.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
301
7 Yet I would that all men be as I myself also am; but each one has
his own gift from God, one thus, another thus.
8 But I say to the unmarried and to the widows, it is good for them if
they remain even as I;
9 yet, if they have not self-control, let them marry; for it is better to
marry than to burn.
10 But to the married I give command, not I, but the Lord, that the
wife depart not from the husband;
11 but if she have actually departed, let her remain unmarried or be
reconciled to her husband; and that the husband put not away the
wife.
12 But to the rest speak I, not the Lord; if any brother has an
unbelieving wife, and she is well pleased to dwell with him, let him
not put her away;
13 and if any woman has an unbelieving husband, and he is well
pleased to dwell with her, let her not put away her husband.
14 For the unbelieving husband is sanctified in the wife, and the
unbelieving wife is sanctified in the brother: otherwise your children
are unclean, but now are they holy.
15 But if the unbelieving depart, let him depart: the brother or the
sister is not bound in such cases. But in peace has God called you.
16 For what knowest thou, O woman, whether thou shalt save thy
husband? or what knowest thou, O man, whether thou shalt save thy
wife?
17 But as the Lord has allotted to each one, as God has called each
one, so let him walk. And so I ordain in all the churches.
18 Was any one called, having been circumcised? let him not become
uncircumcised. Has any one been called in uncircumcision? let him
not be circumcised.
19 Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing; but the
keeping of the commandments of God.
20 Let each one, in the calling in which he was called, in this abide.
21 Thou wast called being a servant; let it not be a care to thee; but if
thou also canst become free, use it rather.
22 For he that is in the Lord, having been called as a servant, is the
Lord’s freedman: in like manner, the free man that has been called is
Christ’s servant.
23 You were bought with a price: become not servants of men.
24 Brethren, let each one, in what condition he was called, in this
abide with God.
25 But concerning virgins, a commandment of the Lord I have not:
yet advice I give as one that has obtained mercy of the Lord to be
faithful.302
Codex Sinaiticus:
26 I suppose therefore this to be good on account of the present
distress, that it is good for a man so to be.
27 Hast thou been bound to a wife? seek not a separation: hast thou
been loosed from a wife? seek not a wife.
28 If however thou hast also married, thou hast not sinned; and if a
virgin marry, she has not sinned; yet affliction in the flesh shall such
persons have; but I spare you.
29 But this I say, brethren, the time is shortened: it remains that
those who have wives be as though they had none,
30 and those who weep as though they wept not, and those who
rejoice as though they rejoiced not, and those who buy as not
possessing,
31 and those who use the world as not abusing it; for the fashion of
this world passes away.
32 But I wish you to be without care. The unmarried man cares for
the things of the Lord, how he shall please the Lord;
33 but the married man cares for the things of the world, how he
shall please his wife.
34 Both the wife and the virgin are divided: the unmarried woman
cares for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy in both body
and spirit; but the married woman cares for the things of the world,
how she shall please her husband.
35 But this I say for your profit, not that I may throw a snare over
you, but with a view to propriety and assiduous attention to the Lord
without distraction.
36 But if any one thinks that he acts in an unbecoming manner
towards his virgin daughter, if she be past the flower of age, and it
must needs so be, let him do what he will; he sins not: let them
marry.
37 But he that has stood steadfast in his heart, having no necessity,
but has power over his own will, and has determined this in his own
heart, to keep his daughter a virgin, does well.
38 So then even he that gives her in marriage does well, and yet he
that gives her not in marriage does better.
39 A wife is bound as long as her husband lives; but if the husband
shall have fallen asleep, she is free to be married to whom she will,
only in the Lord.
40 But she is more blessed if she so abide, according to my judgment.
I think too, even I, that I have the Spirit of God.
1 Corinthians 8
1 But concerning idol-sacrifices we know that we all have knowledge.
Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
303
2 If any one thinks that he knows anything, not yet has he known
anything as he ought to know it;
3 but if any one loves God, he is known by him.
4 Concerning therefore the eating of idol-sacrifices we know that
there is no idol in the world, and that there is no God other than the
one.
5 For although indeed there are those called gods, whether in heaven
or on earth; as there are gods many and lords many;
6 but for us there is one God the Father, from whom are all things
and we to him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, through whom are all
things and we through him.
7 However there is not, in all this, knowledge; but some with
conscience till now of the idols eat as a thing offered to an idol, and
their conscience being weak is defiled.
8 But meat will not commend us to God: neither if we eat not, are we
the worse, neither if we eat, are we the better.
9 But take heed lest perhaps this right of yours become a stumbling-
block to the weak.
10 For if any one see thee that hast knowledge reclining at table in an
idol’s temple, will not the conscience of him that is weak be edified,
so as to eat things sacrificed to idols?
11 For the weak one perishes in thy knowledge, the brother for whom
Christ died.
12 Now in so sinning against the brethren and wounding their weak
conscience, you sin against Christ.
13 Wherefore if meat cause my brother to fall, I will never eat flesh,
lest I cause my brother to fall.
1 Corinthians 9
1 Am I not free? Am I not an apostle? Have I not seen Jesus our
Lord? Are you not my work in the Lord?
2 If to others I am not an apostle, yet certainly to you I am; for the
seal of my apostleship are you in the Lord.
3 This is my defense to them that examine me.
4 Have we not a right to eat and drink?
5 Have we not a right to lead about a sister wife, as the rest of the
apostles also, and the brothers of the Lord, and Cephas?
6 Or I only and Barnabas, have we no right to forbear working?
7 Who ever goes to war at his own charges? Who plants a vineyard,
and eats not its fruit? Or who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of
the flock?
8 Say I these things as a man, or does the law also not speak these?304
Codex Sinaiticus:
9 For in the law of Moses it is written: Thou shalt not muzzle the ox
that treads out the grain. Is it for oxen that God cares?
10 Or on our account altogether does he speak? For on our account
was it written, that he that thrashes ought to thrash in hope, and he
that plows, in hope of partaking.
11 If we have sown to you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we reap
your carnal things?
12 If others partake of this right over you, should not we rather? But
we used not this right; but we endure all things, that we may give no
hindrance to the gospel of Christ.
13 Know you not that those who perform sacred rites eat from the
temple? Those who attend the altar are partakers with the altar?
14 So also has the Lord commanded those that preach the gospel to
live of the gospel;
15 but I have used none of these things. And I have not written these
things that it should be so done in my case; for it were better for me
to die, than that any one should make my cause of glorying void.
16 For if I preach the gospel, I have no cause for glorying; for
necessity is laid upon me; for woe is to me if I preach not the gospel.
17 For if I do this willingly, I have a reward; but if unwillingly, I am
intrusted with a stewardship.
18 What then is my reward? that in preaching the gospel I make the
gospel without charge, that I may not abuse my right in the gospel.
19 For being free from all I made myself servant to all, that I might
gain the greater number;
20 and I became to the Jews as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to
those under law as under law, not being myself under law, that I
might gain those under law;
21 to those without law as without law, not being without law to God,
but under law to Christ, that I might gain those without law;
22 to the weak I became weak, that I might gain the weak: to all I
became all things, that by all means I might save some.
23 And all things I do for the sake of the gospel, that a fellow-
partaker of it I may become.
24 Know you not that those who run in the racecourse all run, but
one takes the prize? So run that you may obtain it.
25 And every one that contends for a prize is temperate in all things:
they indeed then that they may take a corruptible crown, but we an
incorruptible.
26 I therefore so run not as uncertainly, so fight I as not beating the
air;
27 but I bruise my body and bring it into subjection, lest perhaps
having preached to others I myself should become rejected.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
305
1 Corinthians 10
1 For I would not have you ignorant, brethren, that all our fathers
were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea,
2 and were all baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea,
3 and all ate the same spiritual food,
4 and all drank the same spiritual drink; for they drank of the
spiritual rock that followed, and the rock was Christ.
5 But in the greater number of them God had no pleasure; for they
were overthrown in the wilderness.
6 Now these things became types of us, that we should not be
desirers of evil things as they also desired.
7 Neither become idolaters, as some of them, as it is written: The
people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to sport.*
*In idolatrous dance
8 Neither let us commit lewdness, as some of them committed
lewdness, and fell in one day twenty-three thousand.
9 Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them tempted, and were
destroyed by serpents.
10 Neither murmur, as some of them murmured, and were destroyed
by the destroyer.
11 Now these things happened to them as examples, but were written
for the instruction of us, on whom the ends of the ages have come.
12 So then let him that thinks he stands take heed lest he fall.
13 A temptation has not taken you except such as is common to man;
but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above what
you are able, but will make with the temptation a way also of escape,
that you may be able to endure.
14 Wherefore, my beloved, flee from idolatry.
15 As to wise men I speak: judge you what I say.
16 The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the
blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion
of the body of Christ?
17 Because one bread, one body we the many are; for we all partake
of the one bread.
18 See Israel according to the flesh: are not those that eat the
sacrifices partakers of the altar?
19 What then do I say? that an idol-sacrifice is any thing, or that an
idol is any thing?
20 But, that the things which they sacrifice, to demons they sacrifice
and not to God; and I would not have you become partakers with
demons.
21 You can not drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of demons: you
can not partake of the table of the Lord and the table of demons.306
Codex Sinaiticus:
22 Or do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger than he?
23 All things are in my power, but not all things are profitable: all
things are in my power, but not all things edify.
24 Let no one seek that which is his own, but that which is the
other’s.
25 Everything that is sold in the meat-market, eat, examining
nothing on account of conscience;
26 for the earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness of it.
27 And if any one of the unbelievers invites you, and you be disposed
to go, everything that is set before you eat, examining nothing on
account of conscience.
28 But if any one say to you. This is offered in sacrifice; eat not for
his sake that showed it, and for conscience’ sake.
29 Conscience I say, not thy own, but that of the other. For why is my
freedom judged by another’s conscience?
30 If I partake with gratitude, why am I evil spoken of on account of
that for which I give thanks?
31 Whether therefore you eat, or drink, or do any thing, do all to the
glory of God.
32 Give no occasion for stumbling either to Jews or to Greeks or to
the church of God,
33 as I also please every one in all things, not seeking my own profit,
but that of the many, that they may be saved.
1 Corinthians 11
1 Become imitators of me, as I also am of Christ.
2 But I praise you, brethren, that you remember me in all things, and
hold fast the traditions as I delivered them to you.
3 But I wish you to know that the head of every man is Christ, and
the head of every woman is the man, and the head of Christ is God.
4 Every man praying or prophesying having any thing on his head
shames his head.
5 And every woman praying or prophesying with her head uncovered
shames her own head; for it is one and the same thing as if she were
shaved.
6 For if a woman is not covered, let her also be shorn; but if it is a
shame to a woman to be shorn or shaved, let her be covered.
7 For a man indeed should not cover his head, as he is the image and
glory of God; but the woman is the glory of man.
8 For man is not from woman, but woman from man;
9 for man was not created for the woman, but woman for the man.
10 For this reason ought the woman to have authority* on her head
because of the angels.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
307
*A token of subjection.
11 Nevertheless neither is woman without man, nor man without
woman in the Lord;
12 for as the woman is from the man, so also is the man through the
woman, but all things from God.
13 Judge among yourselves; is it becoming that a woman pray to God
uncovered?
14 Does not even nature itself teach you, that, if a man have long
hair, it is a dishonor to him,
15 but if a woman have long hair, it is a glory to her? because her hair
is given for a covering.
16 But if any one seems to be contentious, we have no such custom,
neither the churches of God.
17 Now this I announce not in praise, that you come together not for
the better, but for the worse.
18 For first indeed when you come together in the church, I hear that
schisms are among you, and I in some measure believe it.
19 For there must be parties also among you that the approved also
may become manifest among you.
20 When therefore you come together to the same place, it is not to
eat the Lord’s supper;
21 for in eating, each one takes before another his own supper; and
one is hungry, and another is drunken.
22 Why, have you not houses to eat and drink in? Or the church of
God do you despise, and shame those that have nothing? What shall I
say to you? Shall I praise you? In this I praise you not.
23 For I received from the Lord that which I also delivered to you,
that the Lord Jesus, on the night in which he was delivered up, took
bread,
24 and after giving thanks he broke and said: This is my body which
is for you; this do in remembrance of me.
25 In like manner also the cup, after he had supped, saying: This cup
is the new covenant in my blood: this do, as often as you drink it, in
remembrance of me.
26 For as often as you eat this bread and drink this cup, the death of
the Lord you announce, till he come.
27 So then whoever shall eat the bread or drink the cup of the Lord in
an unworthy manner, shall be guilty of the body and of the blood of
the Lord.
28 But let a man examine himself, and so of the bread let him eat,
and of the cup let him drink;
29 for he that eats and drinks condemnation to himself, eats and
drinks not discerning the body.308
Codex Sinaiticus:
30 For this reason many among you are weak and sickly, and very
many sleep.
31 But if we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged;
32 but being judged by the Lord we are chastened, that we may not
be condemned with the world.
33 So then, my brethren, in coming together to eat, wait one for
another.
34 If any one is hungry, let him eat at home, that you come not
together to condemnation. But the rest will I set in order when I
come.
1 Corinthians 12
1 But concerning spiritual things, brethren, I do not wish you to be
ignorant.
2 You know that when you were Gentiles you were carried away to
the dumb idols as you were led.
3 Wherefore I make known to you that no one speaking in the Spirit
of God says: Accursed is Jesus; and no one can say: Lord Jesus,
unless in the Holy Spirit.
4 Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit;
5 and there are diversities of ministries, and the same Lord;
6 and there are diversities of operations, and the same God who
works all things in all.
7 But to each one is given the manifestation of the Spirit with a view
to the profit of all.
8 For to one is given, through the Spirit, the word of wisdom; to
another, the word of knowledge, according to the same Spirit;
9 to another faith, in the same Spirit; to another gifts of healing, in
the same Spirit;
10 to another the workings of mighty deeds, to another prophecy, to
another discernings of spirits, to another kinds of tongues, to another
interpretation of tongues;
11 but all these work the one and the same Spirit, distributing to each
severally as he wills.
12 For as the body is one, and yet has many members, but all the
members of the body, being many, are one body, so also is Christ;
13 for in one Spirit were we all baptized into one body, whether Jews
or Greeks, whether bond or free, and were all made to drink one
Spirit.
14 For the body is not one member, but many.
15 If the foot should say: Because I am not the hand, I am not of the
body, it is not therefore not of the body.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
309
16 And if the ear should say: Because I am not the eye, I am not of the
body, it is not therefore not of the body.
17 If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? If the
whole were hearing, where were the smelling?
18 But now God set the members, each one of them in the body as it
pleased him.
19 But if they all were one member, where were the body?
20 But now many members, but one body.
21 And the eye can not say to the hand; I have no need of thee: or,
again, the head to the feet: I have no need of you:
22 yes, much more the members of the body that seem to be weaker
are necessary;
23 and those members of the body, which we think to be more
dishonorable, around these we put more abundant honor; and our
uncomely members have more abundant comeliness;
24 and our comely members have no need. But God has well ordered
the body, giving more abundant honor to that which lacked,
25 that there should be no schism in the body, but that the members
should have the same care one for another.
26 And whether one member suffers, all the members sympathize; or
if one member is honored, all the members rejoice with it.
27 Now you are the body of Christ and members in particular.
28 And God has set some in the church, first apostles, secondly
prophets, thirdly teachers, after that powers, after that gifts of
healing, helps, governments, kinds of tongues.
29 Are all apostles? Are all prophets? Are all teachers? Are all
powers? Have all gifts of healing? Do all speak with tongues? Do all
interpret?
31 But ardently desire the greater gifts; and yet I show you a more
excellent way.
1 Corinthians 13
1 Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, but have not
love, I have become sounding brass or a clanging cymbal.
2 And though I have prophecy, and know all mysteries and all
knowledge, and though I have all faith so as to remove mountains,
but have not love, I am nothing.
3 And though I give all my goods away in food, and though I deliver
up my body that I may be burned, but have not love, I am profited
nothing.
4 Love suffers long, is kind; love envies not; love is not boastful, is
not puffed up;310
Codex Sinaiticus:
5 does not behave itself improperly, seeks not her own, is not
provoked, charges not the evil,
6 rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth:
7 bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all
things.
8 Love never fails; but whether prophecies, they shall come to
naught; or tongues, they shall cease; or knowledge, it shall come to
naught.
9 But we know in part, and we prophesy in part:
10 when, however, the perfect has come, that in part shall come to
naught.
11 When I was a child, I talked as a child, I thought as a child, I
reasoned as a child: when I became a man, I put away the things of a
child.
12 For now we see by means of a mirror in an enigma, but then face
to face: now I know in part, but then I shall know even as I was
known.
13 And now abides faith, hope, love, these three; but the greatest of
these is love.
1 Corinthians 14
1 Pursue love, but ardently desire spiritual gifts, rather, however, that
you may prophesy.
2 For he that speaks in a tongue speaks not to men, but to God; for
no one understands, though in spirit he speaks mysteries;
3 but he that prophesies speaks to men edification, and exhortation,
and comfort.
4 He that speaks in a tongue edifies himself; but he that prophesies
edifies the church.
5 Now, I wish you all to speak in tongues, but rather that you
prophesy; and greater is he that prophesies than he that speaks in
tongues, unless he interpret, that the church may receive edification.
6 But now, brethren, if I come to you speaking in tongues, what shall
I profit you, unless I shall speak to you either in revelation, or in
knowledge, or in prophecy, or in teaching?
7 Even things without life, giving sound, whether pipe or harp, yet, if
they give not a distinction in tones, how shall that be known which is
piped or harped?
8 For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare
himself for battle?
9 So, unless you also, through the tongue, give a word easy to be
understood, how shall that be known which is spoken? for you shall
speak into the air.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
311
10 There are, it may be, so many kinds of voices in the world, and no
one of them without signification:
11 if, then, I know not the power of the voice, I shall be to him that
speaks a barbarian, and he that speaks a barbarian, in my judgment.
12 So also you, since you are ardently desirous of spirits, seek that
you may abound with a view to the edification of the church.
13 Wherefore, let him that speaks with a tongue pray that he may
interpret.
14 For if I pray with a tongue, my spirit prays, but my mind is
unfruitful.
15 What, then, is it? I will pray with the spirit, but I will pray with the
mind also: I will sing with the spirit, but I will sing with the mind
also.
16 Else, if thou shalt have blessed with the spirit, he that occupies the
place of the unlearned, how shall he say the amen at thy giving of
thanks? since he knows not what thou sayest;
17 for thou indeed givest thanks well, but the other is not edified.
18 I thank God, I speak with a tongue more than you all;
19 but in the church I prefer to speak five words through my mind,
that I may instruct others also, than ten thousand words in a tongue.
20 Brethren, become not little children in understanding, but in
malice be childlike, but in understanding become full-grown men.
21 In the law it is written: In words of another tongue and in other
lips will I speak to this people, and not even thus will they hearken to
me, says the Lord.
22 So, then, the tongues are for a sign, not for the believers, but for
the unbelievers, but prophecy, not for the unbelievers, but for the
believers.
23 If, then, the whole church shall have come together into the same
place, and all speak with tongues, but there come in unlearned men
or unbelievers, will they not say that you are mad?
24 But if all prophesy, and there come in any unbeliever or unlearned
man, he is convinced by all, he is judged by all;
25 the secrets of his heart become manifest; and so, falling on his
face, he will worship God, reporting that in reality God is in you.
26 What, then, is it, brethren? When you come together, each one of
you has a psalm, has a teaching, has a revelation, has a tongue, has
an interpretation: let all things be done with a view to edification.
27 If any one speaks with a tongue, by twos, or, at most, by threes,
and in turn, and let one interpret;
28 but if there be no interpreter, let him be silent in the church, but
let him speak to himself and to God.
29 And let two or three prophets speak, and let the others discern;312
Codex Sinaiticus:
30 but if a revelation be made to another sitting by, let the first be
silent.
31 For you can all prophesy one by one, that all may learn and all be
comforted.
32 And the spirits of prophets are subject to prophets;
33 for God is not of disorder, but of peace. As in all the churches of
the saints,
34 let your women be silent in the churches; for it is not permitted to
them to speak, but to be in subjection, as the law also says.
35 But if they wish to learn any thing, let them ask their own
husbands at home; for it is a shame to a woman to speak in a church.
36 Or came the word of God out from you, or to you only did it come?
37 If any one thinks he is a prophet or spiritual, let him acknowledge
the things which I write. that they are of the Lord;
38 but if one is ignorant, let him be ignorant.
39 So then, brethren, ardently desire to prophesy, and forbid not to
speak with tongues;
40 but let all things be done in a becoming manner and in order.
1 Corinthians 15
1 Moreover, I make known to you, brethren, the gospel which I
preached to you, which also you received, in which also you have
stood.
2 through which also you are saved, if you hold fast with what word I
preached to you, unless you believed in vain.
3 For I delivered to you, among the first things, that which I also
received; that Christ died for our sins, according to the Scriptures;
4 and that he was buried; and that he rose from the dead on the third
day, according to the Scriptures;
5 and that he appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve.
6 After that he appeared to more than five hundred brethren at once,
of whom the greater part remain till now, but some have also fallen
asleep.
7 After that he appeared to James, after that to all the apostles.
8 But, last of all, as to the one born out of due time, he appeared to
me also.
9 For I am the least of the apostles, who am not worthy to be called
an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God;
10 but by the grace of God I am what I am, and his grace which was
for me became not vain, but I labored more abundantly than they all:
not I, however, but the grace of God which was with me.
11 Whether, therefore, I or they, so we preach, and so you believed.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
313
12 But if Christ is preached that he has risen from the dead, how say
some among you that there is no resurrection of the dead?
13 But if there is no resurrection of the dead, neither has Christ been
raised;
14 and if Christ has not been raised, vain then both what we
preached, and vain also your faith:
15 further, we are also found false witnesses of God, because we
testified against God that he raised up Christ whom lie did not raise,
if indeed then the dead are not raised.
16 For if the dead are not raised, neither has Christ been raised;
17 but if Christ has not been raised, fruitless your faith, you are yet in
your sins:
18 then also those that have fallen asleep in Christ have perished.
19 If only in this life we have been hoping in Christ, more miserable
than all men are we.
20 But now has Christ been raised from the dead, the firstfruits of
those that have slept.
21 For since through man death, through man also the resurrection
of the dead.
22 For as in Adam all die, so also in Christ shall all be made alive.
23 But each one in his own order; the firstfruit Christ, afterward
those that are Christ’s at his coming:
24 then the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to the
God and Father, when he shall have destroyed all principality and all
authority and power.
25 For he must reign till he shall have put all enemies under his feet.
26 Death, the last enemy, shall be destroyed.
27 For he has put all things under his feet. But when he shall have
said that all things have been subjected, it is evident that he is
excepted who subjected all things to him;
28 but when all things shall have been subjected to him, then shall
the Son also be subjected to him who subjected all things to him, that
God may be the all in all.
29 Otherwise, what shall they do who are baptized for the dead? If
the dead are not raised at all, why are they even baptized for them?
30 Why also are we in danger every hour?
31 I protest by the rejoicing over you, brethren, which I have in Christ
Jesus our Lord, I die daily.
32 If as a man I fought with wild beasts in Ephesus, what advantage
is it to me? If the dead are not raised, let us eat and drink, for
tomorrow we die.
33 Be not deceived: Evil communications corrupt good manners.314
Codex Sinaiticus:
34 Awake to sobriety, as it is right, and sin not: for ignorance of God
some have. For shame to you I speak.
35 But some one will say: How are the dead raised up? and with what
body do they come?
36 Foolish man, that which thou sowest is not made alive unless it
die;
37 and that which thou sowest, thou sowest not the body that shall be
produced, but naked grain it may be of wheat, or some of the rest;
38 but God gives it a body as it pleased him, and to each of the seeds
its own body.
39 All flesh is not the same flesh, but one indeed of men, but another
flesh of beasts, but another flesh of birds, but another of fishes.
40 And there are bodies celestial, and bodies terrestrial; but the glory
of the celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial another.
41 There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and
another glory of the stars; for star differs from star in glory.
42 So also the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption, it is
raised in incorruption.
43 It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory: it is sown in weakness,
it is raised in power:
44 it is sown a psychical body*, it is raised a spiritual body. If there is
a psychical body, there is also a spiritual body.
* soma psuchikon = flesh soulish or soulish flesh. ed.
45 So also it is written: The first man Adam was made a living soul,
the last Adam a life-giving spirit.
46 But not first the spiritual, but the psychical: after that the
spiritual.
47 The first man is from the earth, earthy; the second man, from
heaven.
48 As the earthy, such also the earthy; and as the heavenly, such also
the heavenly;
49 and as we have worn the image of the earthy, we shall also wear
the image of the heavenly.
50 But this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the
kingdom of God, neither does corruption inherit incorruption.
51 Behold, I tell you a mystery; we shall not all sleep, but we shall all
be changed,
52 in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet; for
the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible,
and we shall be changed.
53 For this corruptible must put on incorruptibility, and this mortal
must put on immortality.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
315
54 And when this corruptible shall have put on incorruptibility, and
this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall come to pass the
saying that is written: Death is swallowed up in victory.
55 Where thy sting, O death? Where thy victory, O death?
56 The sting of death is sin, but the strength of sin is the law.
57 But thanks to God who gives us the victory through our Lord
Jesus Christ.
58 So then, my beloved brethren, become steadfast, immovable,
abounding in the work of the Lord always, knowing that your labor is
not in vain in the Lord.
1 Corinthians 16
1 But concerning the collection which is for the saints, as I gave order
to the churches of Galatia, so also do you.
2 On every first day of the week let each one of you lay by himself,
treasuring up whatever he has been prospered, that there be no
collections when I come.
3 And when I have come, whomever you may approve, these will I
send with letters to bear your favor to Jerusalem;
4 and if it be worth my going also, they shall go with me.
5 But I will come to you when I shall have passed through
Macedonia;
6 for I am going through Macedonia, but with you, it may be, I shall
remain or even spend the winter, that you may send me forward
wherever I may go.
7 For I do not wish to see you now in passing; for I hope to remain
some time with you, if the Lord permit.
8 But I shall abide in Ephesus till Pentecost;
9 for there has been opened to me a door great and effectual, and
there are many adversaries.
10 Now if Timothy come, see that he be with you without fear; for he
works the work of the Lord as I also do:
11 let no one therefore despise him. But send him forward in peace,
that he may come to me; for I wait for him with the brethren.
12 But concerning Apollos the brother, I exhorted him much to come
to you with the brethren; and his will was not at all to come now; but
he will come when he shall have opportunity.
13 Watch, stand firm in the faith, act like men, be strong.
14 Let all your deeds be done in love.
15 Now I beseech you, brethren: you know the house of Stephanas,
that it is the firstfruit of Achaia, and they have given themselves to
the ministry of the saints:316
Codex Sinaiticus:
16 that you also submit yourselves to those that are such, and to
every one that works with me and labors.
17 But I rejoice at the coming of Stephanas and Fortunatus and
Achaicus, because they have supplied the want of you;
18 for they have refreshed my spirit and yours. Therefore
acknowledge those that are such.
19 The churches of Asia salute you. Aquila and Prisca, with the
church that is in their house, salute you much in the Lord.
20 All the brethren salute you. Salute one another with a holy kiss.
21 The salutation of Paul with my own hand.
22 If any one loves not the Lord, let him be accursed. The Lord
comes.
23 The grace of the Lord Jesus be with you.
24 My love with you all in Christ Jesus.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
317318
Codex Sinaiticus:
Paul to the Corinthians 2
2 Corinthians 1
1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through the will of God, and
Timothy the brother, to the church of God which is in Corinth, with
all the saints that are in all Achaia.
2 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus
Christ.
3 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father
of mercies and God of all comfort,
4 who comforts us in all our affliction, that we may be able to comfort
those that are in all affliction through the comfort with which we
ourselves are comforted by God;
5 for as the sufferings of Christ abound toward us, so through Christ
our comfort also abounds.
6 But whether we are afflicted, it is for your comfort and salvation
which is effectual in the enduring of the same sufferings which we
also suffer; and our hope of you is firm: or if we are comforted, it is
for your comfort and salvation,
7 knowing that as you are partakers of the sufferings, so also of the
comfort.
8 For we do not wish you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning our
affliction that came upon us in Asia, that we were exceedingly
pressed beyond our strength, so that we despaired even of life;
9 but we ourselves have had in ourselves the sentence of death, that
we should not trust in ourselves, but in God who raises the dead,
10 who delivered us from so great a death and does deliver, on whom
we hope that he will even yet deliver,
11 you also helping together by prayer for us, that for the gift
bestowed on us because of the prayers of many persons, thanks may
be given through many on our behalf.
12 For our glorying is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity, not in carnal wisdom, but in the grace
of God, have we conducted ourselves in the world, but more
abundantly with you.
13 For we write no other things to you than what you read or even
acknowledge; and I hope you will acknowledge even to the end,
14 even as you also acknowledge us in part, that we are your cause of
glorying as you also are ours in the day of the Lord Jesus.
15 And in this confidence I intended before to come to you, that you
might have a second benefit;
16 and through you to pass into Macedonia, and to come again from
Macedonia to you; and by you to be sent forward into Judea.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
319
17 Intending this, then, did I use lightness? Or the things which I
intend, do I intend according to the flesh, that there should be with
me the yes yes and the no no?
18 But as God is faithful, our word which is toward you is not yes and
no.
19 For the Son of God, Christ Jesus, who was preached among you
through us-through me, and Silvanus, and Timothy: was not yes and
no, but in him was yes.
20 For as many promises of God as there are, in him is the yes, and
in him the amen to the glory of God through us.
21 Now he who establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us
is God,
22 who has also sealed us and given us the earnest of the Spirit in our
hearts.
23 But I call God as a witness against my soul, that, because I would
spare you, I came no more to Corinth.
24 Not that we are lords over your faith, but we are helpers of your
joy; for by faith you stand.
2 Corinthians 2
1 But I determined this for myself, that I would not come to you again
in sorrow.
2 For if I give you sorrow, who then is he that gives me joy but he that
is made sorrowful by me?
3 And I wrote this very thing, that I might not on coming have sorrow
from those from whom I ought to have joy, having confidence in you
all that my joy is the joy of you all.
4 For out of much affliction and distress of heart I wrote to you
through many tears, not that you might be made sorrowful, but that
you might know the love that I have more abundantly toward you.
5 But if any one has caused sorrow, he has not made me sorrowful,
but in part, that I may not overcharge all of you.
6 Sufficient for such a one is this punishment that was inflicted by
the many:
7 so that on the other hand you should rather forgive and comfort
that one, lest exceeding sorrow should swallow up such a one.
8 Wherefore I exhort you to confirm to him your love;
9 for to this end also did I write, that I might know the proof of you,
whether you are obedient in all things.
10 Now to whom you forgive anything, I also forgive; for what I have
forgiven, if I have forgiven anything, for your sakes I forgive it in the
person of Christ,
11 lest Satan should gain an advantage over us; for of his devices we
are not ignorant.320
Codex Sinaiticus:
12 But when I came to Troas for the gospel of Christ, and a door was
opened to me in the Lord,
13 I had no rest in my spirit because I found not Titus my brother;
but taking leave of them I went forth into Macedonia.
14 Now thanks to God, who always causes us to triumph in Christ,
and makes manifest the odor of his knowledge through us in every
place;
15 for we are to God a sweet odor of Christ in the saved and in the
lost:
16 to the one an odor from death to death, to the other an odor from
life to life. And for these things, who is sufficient?
17 For we are not as the many that corrupt the word of God, but as
from sincerity, but as from God, in the sight of God we speak in
Christ.
2 Corinthians 3
1 Do we begin again to commend ourselves? Or need we, as some,
letters of commendation to you, or of commendation from you?
2 You are our epistle, written in our hearts, known and read by all
men:
3 being made manifest that you are an epistle of Christ, ministered
by us, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God. Not
in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart.
4 But such trust have we through Christ toward God.
5 Not that we are sufficient to think anything from ourselves as of
ourselves, but our sufficiency is of God,
6 who also made us sufficient as ministers of the new covenant, not
of letter, but of spirit; for the letter kills, but the spirit makes alive.
7 But if the ministration of death in letters, which was engraved on
stones, was made in glory, so that the sons of Israel were not able to
look steadfastly upon the face of Moses because of the glory of his
face, which glory was to be done away,
8 how shall not the ministration of the spirit be in glory?
9 For if the ministration of condemnation is glory, much more does
the ministration of the spirit abound in glory.
10 For that which has been made glorious has not been made
glorious in this respect because of the excelling glory.
11 For if that which is done away was through glory, much more that
which remains is in glory.
12 Having therefore this hope, we use great boldness of speech,
13 and not as Moses put a veil over his face, that the sons of Israel
might not look steadfastly to the end of that which was to be done
away.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
321
14 But their understandings were hardened. For till this day the same
veil in the reading of the old covenant remains, not taken away
because in Christ it is done away;
15 but till this day when Moses is read a veil lies over their heart;
16 but when it has turned to the Lord, the veil is taken away.
17 Now the Lord is the Spirit; and where the Spirit of the Lord is, is
freedom.
18 But we all, with unveiled face, beholding as in a mirror the glory of
the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even
as by the Lord the Spirit.
2 Corinthians 4
1 Wherefore, having this ministry, as we have received mercy, we
faint not,
2 but have renounced the secret things of shame, not walking in
craftiness, nor falsifying the word of God, but by manifestation of the
truth commending ourselves to every man’s conscience in the sight of
God.
3 But if our gospel is also veiled, among those that perish it is veiled,
4 among whom the god of this age has darkened the understandings
of the unbelieving, that the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ,
who is the image of God, might not shine forth.
5 For not ourselves do we preach, but Christ Jesus the Lord, but
ourselves your servants for Jesus’ sake.
6 For the God who said that out of darkness light should shine, he
has shined in our hearts for the shining of the knowledge of the glory
of God in the face of Christ.
7 But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the exceeding
greatness of the power may be God’s, and not of us:
8 we are pressed in every way, but not straitened; perplexed, but not
in despair;
9 persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed;
10 always bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus, that the life
also of Jesus may be made manifest in our body.
11 For we that live are always delivered up to death for Jesus’ sake,
that the life also of Jesus may be made manifest in our mortal flesh.
12 So that death works in us, but life in you.
13 But having the same spirit of faith, according to that which is
written: I believed, therefore I spoke; we also believe, and therefore
also speak:
14 knowing that 1 he who raised up the Lord Jesus, will also raise us
up with Jesus, and present us with you.322
Codex Sinaiticus:
15 For all things are for your sakes, that the grace that abounds
through: the greater number may multiply thanksgiving to the glory
of God.
16 Wherefore, we faint not; but though our outward man perish, yet
the inward is renewed day by day.
17 For the momentary lightness of our affliction works for us
exceeding abundantly an eternal weight of glory,
18 while we look not at the things seen, but at the things not seen; for
the things seen are temporal, but those not seen are eternal.
2 Corinthians 5
1 For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were
dissolved, a building from God have we, a house not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens.
2 For in this we groan, earnestly desiring to put on over it our house
that is from heaven,
3 since, indeed, having been clothed, we shall not be found naked.
4 For we that are in the tabernacle do groan, being burdened,
because we do not wish to be unclothed, but clothed upon, that what
is mortal may be swallowed up by life.
5 Now he that has wrought us up to this very thing is God, who has
also given us the earnest of the Spirit.
6 Being confident therefore always, and knowing that being at home
in the body we are away from home from the Lord;
7 for by means of faith we walk, not by means of sight:
8 we are confident, I say, and well pleased to be away from home out
of the body, and to be at home with the Lord.
9 Wherefore also we make our aim, whether at home or away from
home, to be well-pleasing to him.
10 For we must all be made manifest before the judgment-seat of
Christ, that each one may receive the things done in the body
according to what he has done, whether good or evil.
11 Knowing therefore the fear of the Lord, we persuade men; but we
have been made manifest to God; and I hope also that we have been
made manifest in your consciences.
12 For we do not again commend ourselves to you, but are giving you
an occasion for glorying on our behalf, that you may have an answer
to those who glory in appearance, and not in heart.
13 For if we have been beside ourselves, it is for God: if we are sober,
it is for you.
14 For the love of Christ constrains us,
15 because we thus judged, that if one died for all, then all died; and
he died for all that they that live should live no longer for themselves,
but for him who died and rose for them.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
323
16 So that henceforth we know no one according to the flesh; and
even if we have known Christ according to the flesh, yet now no
longer do we know him.
17 So that if any one is in Christ, he is a new creature: the old things
have passed away, behold, all things have become new.
18 And all things are from God, who has reconciled us to himself
through Christ, and has given to us the ministry of reconciliation,
19 seeing that God was reconciling to himself a world in Christ, not
charging to them their offenses, and deposited in us the word of
reconciliation.
20 For Christ, then, we act as ambassadors, as if God is beseeching
through us: we pray in behalf of Christ, be reconciled to God.
21 Him that knew no sin made he sin for us, that we might become
the righteousness of God in him.
2 Corinthians 6
1 Now working together with him, we also beseech that you receive
not the grace of God in vain
2 (for he says: In an acceptable season I heard thee, and in a day of
salvation I helped thee: behold, now is a well-accepted season;
behold, now is a day of salvation).
3 Giving no occasion for stumbling in any thing that the ministry be
not blamed,
4 but as ministers of God commending ourselves in everything; in
much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in straits,
5 in stripes, in imprisonment’s, in tumults, in labors, in watchings, in
fastings,
6 in purity, in knowledge, in longsuffering, in kindness, in the Holy
Spirit, in love unfeigned,
7 in the word of truth, in the power of God; through the armor of
righteousness on the right hand and on the left,
8 through glory and dishonor, through evil and good report: as
deceivers and true;
9 as unknown and well known; as dying; and behold, we live; as
chastened and not killed;
10 as sorrowing, but always rejoicing; as poor, but making many rich;
as having nothing, and possessing all things.
11 Our mouth has been opened to you. Corinthians, our heart has
been enlarged;
12 you are not straitened in us, but you are straitened in your own
bowels:
13 now that you may repay me in like manner, I speak as to children,
be you also enlarged.324
Codex Sinaiticus:
14 Be not yoked with others, unbelievers: for what participation have
righteousness and lawlessness? or what communion has light with
darkness?
15 and what concord has Christ with Belial? Or what part has a
believer with an unbeliever?
16 And what agreement has the temple of God with idols? For you
are the temple of the living God, as God has said: I will dwell in them
and walk among them, and I will be their God and they shall be to me
a people.
17 Wherefore come out from the midst of them, and be separated,
says the Lord, and touch not an unclean thing; and I will receive you,
18 and I will be to you a Father, and you shall be to me sons and
daughters, says the Lord Almighty.
2 Corinthians 7
1 Having therefore these promises, beloved, let us cleanse ourselves
from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of
God.
2 Receive us: we wronged no man, we corrupted no man, we
defrauded no man.
3 Not with a view to condemnation do I speak; for I have said before
that you are in our hearts to die and live with.
4 Great is my boldness toward you, great is my glorying concerning
you: I have been filled with comfort, I exceedingly abound in joy in
all our affliction.
5 For when we came into Macedonia our flesh had no rest, but in
every way were we pressed: fightings without, fears within.
6 But God who comforts those that are cast down comforted us in the
coming of Titus;
7 and not only in his coming, but also with the comfort with which he
was comforted among you, when he told us of your strong desire,
your mourning, your zeal for me, so that I rejoiced the more.
8 For though I made you sorry by means of the letter, I do not regret
it: though I did regret it (for I see that that letter made you sorry,
though for an hour),
9 now I rejoice, not that you were made sorry, but that you sorrowed
to repentance; for you sorrowed according to God, that you might
receive injury from us in nothing.
10 For sorrow according to God works repentance to salvation not to
be regretted; but the sorrow of the world works out death.
11 For behold, this very thing that you sorrowed according to God,
what diligence it wrought out in you, yes rather, defense, yes rather,
indignation, yes rather, fear, yes rather, strong desire, yes rather,The H. T. Anderson New Testament
325
zeal, yes rather, infliction of punishment. In every respect you have
shown yourselves to be pure in this matter.
12 Therefore, although I wrote to you, I wrote not for his sake who
had done the wrong, nor for his sake who had suffered the wrong, but
that your zeal for us might be made manifest to you in the sight of
God.
13 Therefore we have been comforted. But in addition to our comfort
we rejoiced exceedingly more at the joy of Titus, because his spirit
has been refreshed by you all;
14 for if in anything I boasted of you to him, I was not made
ashamed; but as we spoke all things to you in truth, so also our
boasting which was before Titus was found to be truth.
15 And his inward affection is more abundant toward you, while he
remembers the obedience of you all. How with fear and trembling
you received him.
16 I rejoice that I have confidence in you in everything.
2 Corinthians 8
1 But we make known to you, brethren, the grace of God which has
been bestowed among the churches of Macedonia,
2 that in a great trial of affliction the excess of their joy and their
deep poverty abounded to the riches of their liberality;
3 for according to their power, I testify, and beyond their power,
being willing of themselves,
4 with much entreaty beseeching of us the favor and the participation
in the ministration which is for the saints,
5 and not as we had hoped, but themselves they gave first to the Lord
and to us through the will of God,
6 so that we have besought Titus, that as he had before begun, so also
he would complete among you this grace.
7 But as you abound in everything, in faith, and speech, and
knowledge, and all diligence, and your love to us, see that you
abound also in this grace.
8 Not as a commandment do I speak it, but by means of the
forwardness of others, and to prove the sincerity of your love;
9 for you know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was
rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that you through his poverty
might become rich.
10 And I give an opinion in this matter; for this is profitable for you,
who began before them not only to do, but also to be willing since
last year;
11 but now complete also the doing, that as there was the readiness of
willing, so also there may be the completion out of what you have.326
Codex Sinaiticus:
12 For if the readiness of mind is present, it is accepted according to
what it may have, not according to what it has not.
13 For it is not that there should be ease to others, but burden to you,
but by equality: at the present time your abundance may be for their
want,
14 that their abundance may be for your want, that there may be
equality,
15 as it is written: He that gathered much had nothing over, and he
that gathered little had no lack.
16 But thanks to God who is putting the same zeal for you into the
heart of Titus;
17 for he accepted indeed the exhortation; but being more zealous, he
went to you of his own accord.
18 And we sent with him the brother, whose praise in the gospel is
through all the churches,
19 and not that only, but who also was chosen by the churches as our
fellow-traveler with this grace which is ministered by us with a view
to the glory of the Lord himself, and the manifestation of our
readiness of mind,
20 avoiding this: that no one should reproach us in this abundance
that is ministered by us;
21 for we provide for things honorable, not only in the sight of the
Lord, but also in the sight of men.
22 And we have sent with them our brother, whom we have in many
things and at many times proved to be diligent, but now much more
diligent because of the great confidence he has in you.
23 Whether any one inquire of Titus, he is my companion and fellow-
workman for you: or if our brethren be inquired of, they are the
apostles of churches, the glory of Christ.
24 Therefore, the proof of your love and of our glorying concerning
you, to them you will show in the presence of the churches,
2 Corinthians 9
1 For indeed concerning the relief which is for the saints, it is
superfluous for me to write to you;
2 for I know your forwardness, of which I boast concerning you to the
Macedonians, that Achaia has been ready since last year, and your
zeal has roused the greater number.
3 But have sent the brethren, that our boasting concerning you may
not be in vain in this respect; that, as I said, you may be ready:
4 lest perhaps if Macedonians come with me, and find you
unprepared, we, that we say not you, should be ashamed in this
confidence.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
327
5 I thought it necessary therefore to exhort the brethren, that they
would go before to you, and make up beforehand your blessing that
was promised before, that this may be ready as a blessing, and not as
covetousness.
6 But as to this, he that sows sparingly shall also reap sparingly, and
he that sows with blessings shall also reap with blessings.
7 Let each one give as he purposes in his heart, not from sorrow or
from necessity; for God loves a cheerful giver.
8 And God is able to make every grace abound to you, that you
having always all sufficiency in everything, may abound for every
good work;
9 as it is written: He scattered abroad, he gave to the poor, his
righteousness remains for ever.
10 But he that supplies seed for the sower, and bread for eating, will
supply and multiply your seed sown, and increase the fruits of your
righteousness:
11 being enriched in everything for all liberality, which works out
through us thanksgiving to God.
12 Because the administration of this service not only supplies the
wants of the saints, but also abounds through many thanksgivings to
God:
13 as, through the proof which this ministration gives, they glorify
God for the subjection that is caused by your confession in respect to
the gospel of Christ, and for the liberality of the contribution for
them and for all,
14 and by their prayer for you, since they long for you on account of
the exceeding grace of God that is in you.
15 Thanks to God for his unspeakable gift.
2 Corinthians 10
1 Now I Paul myself beseech you by the meekness and gentleness of
Christ, who in presence indeed am lowly among you, but being
absent am bold towards you;
2 but I entreat that I may not when present be bold with that
confidence, with which I think to be bold against some who think of
us as if we walk according to the flesh.
3 For though walking in the flesh, we do not war according to the
flesh
4 (for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through
God for the pulling down of strongholds),
5 casting down reasonings and every high thing that exalts itself
against the knowledge of God, and leading captive every thought to
the obedience of Christ,328
Codex Sinaiticus:
6 and having in readiness to inflict punishment on every failure in
obedience, when your obedience is fulfilled.
7 Do you look on things according to outward appearance? If anyone
confides in himself that he is Christ’s, let him conclude this again of
himself, that as he is Christ’s, so also are we Christ’s.
8 For even if I should boast somewhat more abundantly of our
authority, which the Lord gave us for edification, and not for your
destruction, I shall not be made ashamed.
9 That I may not seem as if I would terrify you by letters.
10 For his letters, say they, are weighty and powerful, but his bodily
presence weak, and his speech contemptible.
11 Let such a one think this, that such as we are in word by letters,
when absent, such are we also in deed, when present.
12 For we dare not number ourselves among or compare ourselves
with some that commend themselves; but they, measuring
themselves among themselves, and comparing themselves with
themselves, are not wise.
13 But we will not boast without measure, but according to the
measure of the rule, which God has apportioned to us, a measure to
reach even to you.
14 For we do not stretch ourselves too far, as if we do not come to
you; for even as far as to you did we come first in the gospel of Christ,
15 not boasting without measure in the labors of others; but having
hope, when your faith is increased, to be enlarged among you
according to our rule, abundantly,
16 to preach the gospel in regions beyond you, not to boast ourselves
in things made ready in another man’s line.
17 But he that boasts, in the Lord let him boast;
18 for not he that commends himself is approved, but he whom the
Lord commends.
2 Corinthians 11
1 Would that you could bear with some little of my folly; but indeed
you do bear with me.
2 For I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy: for I have espoused
you to one husband that I may present a chaste virgin to Christ:
3 I fear, however, lest perhaps, as the serpent completely deceived
Eve in his craftiness, so your minds should be corrupted from the
simplicity that is in Christ.
4 For if indeed he that comes preaches another Jesus whom we did
not preach, or you receive another spirit which you did not receive, or
another gospel which you did not accept, you might well bear with
him;
5 for I think that I am in nothing inferior to these very great apostles.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
329
6 If, however, I am rude in speech, yet not in knowledge, but in
everything we have made it manifest toward you among all.
7 Or did I commit a sin in abasing myself that you might be exalted,
because I preached to you the gospel of God without charge?
8 I robbed other churches, taking wages to do you service; and when
present with you, though in want, I was a burden to no one;
9 for my want the brethren who came from Macedonia supplied; and
in everything I have kept myself from being burdensome to you, and
will keep myself.
10 The truth of Christ is in me, that this boasting shall not be stopped
in my case in the regions of Achaia.
11 Why? Because I love you not? God knows.
12 But what I do, I will also do, that I may cut off occasion from them
that desire the occasion, that in what they boast they may be found
even as we.
13 For such as they are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming
themselves into apostles of Christ.
14 And no wonder; for Satan himself transforms himself into an
angel of light.
15 No great thing, then, if his ministers also transform themselves as
ministers of righteousness: whose end shall be according to their
works.
16 I say again, let no one think that I am foolish; but if otherwise at
least as foolish receive me, that I also may boast myself some little.
17 What I say, I say not according to the Lord, but as in folly, in this
confidence of boasting.
18 Since many boast according to the flesh I also will boast.
19 For you bear with the foolish with pleasure, since you are wise;
20 for you bear with it if any one brings you into bond age, if any one
devours you, if an one seizes upon you, if any on exalts himself, if any
one smite you on the face.
21 To my reproach I say it, that we were weak but in whatever any
one is bold, in folly I say it. I also am bold.
22 Are they Hebrews? I also. Are they Israelites? I also. Are they the
posterity of Abraham? I also.
23 Are they ministers of Christ? Speak as if beside myself, I more in
labors more abundant, in stripe above measure, in prisons more
frequently, in deaths often;
24 of the Jews five times received forty stripes save one,
25 three times was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, three times
have I beer shipwrecked, a night and a day; spent I in the deep:
26 in journeying; often, in dangers of rivers, in dangers of robbers, in
dangers from my countrymen, in dangers from Gentiles, in dangers330
Codex Sinaiticus:
in the city, in dangers in the desert, in danger; in the sea, in dangers
among false brethren,
27 in labor and toil, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in
fastings often, in cold and nakedness.
28 Apart from things besides these, that which presses upon me
daily, the care of all the churches.
29 Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is ensnared, and I burn
not?
30 If I must boast, of the things that concern my infirmities will I
boast.
31 The God and Father of our Lord Jesus, who is blessed throughout
the ages, knows that I lie not.
32 In Damascus, the governor under Aretas the king guarded the city
of the Damascenes, that he might apprehend me;
33 and through a window, I was let down in a basket, through the
wall, and escaped his hands.
2 Corinthians 12
1 To boast surely profits me not; for I will come to visions and
revelations of the Lord.
2 I know a man in Christ, fourteen; years ago, whether in the body I
know not, or out of the body I know not, God knows, such a one was
caught away even to the third heaven.
3 And I know such a man, whether in the body or apart from the
body I know not, God knows;
4 that he was caught away into paradise, and heard unspeakable
words, which it is not lawful for man to utter.
5 Concerning such a one I will boast, but concerning myself I will not
boast, except in my infirmities.
6 For though I should desire to boast, I shall not be foolish, for I will
speak the truth; but I forbear, lest any one should think with regard
to me above what he sees me, or hears anything from me.
7 And, lest I might be exalted above measure through the exceeding
greatness of the revelations, there was given me a thorn in the flesh, a
message of Satan that he might buffet me, that I might not be exalted
above measure.
8 Concerning this, three times did I beseech the Lord that it might
depart from me.
9 And he said to me: My grace is sufficient for thee; for my power is
perfected in weakness. Most gladly; then will I rather glory in my
infirmities, that the power of Christ may abide upon me.
10 Wherefore I am well pleased in infirmities, in outrages, in
necessities, in persecutions. in straits, for Christ’s sake; for when I
am weak, then am I strong.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
331
11 I have become foolish: you have compelled me. For I ought to be
commended by you; for in nothing was I inferior to these very great
apostles, though I am nothing.
12 The signs indeed of the apostle were wrought out among you in all
patience, in signs and wonders and mighty deeds.
13 For what is that in which you were inferior to the other churches,
except that I did not become a burden to you? Forgive me this wrong.
14 Behold, I am ready, to come to you the third time, and I will not be
a burden to you; for I seek not yours, but you. For the children ought
not to lay up treasure for the parents, but the parents for the
children.
15 And I will most gladly spend and be spent for your souls, though
the more abundantly I love you, the less I am loved.
16 But be it so, I did not become a burden to you; but, being crafty, I
caught you with guile.
17 Did I make gain of you by any one of those that I sent to you?
18 I besought Titus, and with him sent the brother. Did Titus make
gain of you? Walked we not in the same spirit? not in the same steps?
19 For a long time you are thinking that to you we are making a
defense. In the presence of God in Christ do we speak; but all things,
beloved, for your edification.
20 For I fear lest perhaps on coming I shall find you not such as I
wish, and I shall be found to you as you do not wish; lest perhaps
there be contentions, envyings, wraths, factions, evil-speakings,
whisperings, high-mindedness, tumults:
21 lest when I come again my God will humble me with respect to
you, and I shall bewail many of them that have sinned before, and
have not repented because of the uncleanness, and lewdness, and
wantonness which they have committed.
2 Corinthians 13
1 This third time am I am coming to you: in the mouth of two or
three witnesses shall every word be established.
2 I have said before, and I foretell, as when present the second time,
also now in my absence, to those who have sinned before and to all
the rest, that if I come again. I will not spare.
3 Since you seek a proof of Christ speaking in me, who toward you is
not weak, but is mighty in you;
4 for though he was crucified through weakness, yet he lives by the
power of God; for we are weak in him, but we shall live with him
through the power of God toward you.
5 Try yourselves, whether you are in the faith, prove yourselves: or do
you not know yourselves, that Christ Jesus is in you? unless you are
disapproved.332
Codex Sinaiticus:
6 But I hope that you shall know that we are not disapproved.
7 But we pray to God that you may do no evil, not that we may appear
approved, but that you may do what is excellent, though we be as
disapproved.
8 For we can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth.
9 For we rejoice when we are weak, and you are strong: this also we
pray for, your perfect union.
10 For this reason I write these things while absent, that I may not,
when present, use severity, according to the authority which the Lord
gave me for edification, and not for destruction.
11 Finally, brethren, rejoice; be perfectly united, be comforted, be of
the same mind, live in peace, and the God of love and of peace shall
be with you.
12 Salute one another with a holy kiss.
13 All the saints salute you.
14 The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the
communion of the Holy Spirit, be with you all.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
333334
Codex Sinaiticus:
Paul to the Galatians
Galatians 1
1 Paul an apostle, not of men, neither through man, but through
Jesus Christ and God the Father, who raised him from the dead,
2 and all the brethren that are with me, to the churches of Galatia.
3 Grace to you and peace from God the Father and our Lord Jesus
Christ,
4 who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this
present evil age, according to the will of our God and Father,
5 to whom be glory from age to age: amen.
6 I wonder that you are so soon turning away from him that called
you into the grace of Christ, to a different gospel,
7 which is not another, except that there are some that trouble you,
and wish to pervert the gospel of Christ.
8 But though even we or an angel from heaven preach to you a gospel
beside that which we preached to you, let him be accursed.
9 As we have said before, even now I say again, if any one preach to
you a gospel beside that which you received, let him be accursed.
10 For do I now persuade men or God? or seek I to please men? For
if I yet pleased men, Christ’s servant I should not be.
11 But I make known to you, brethren, the gospel that was preached
by me, that it is not according to man;
12 for neither received I it from man, nor was I taught it, but through
a revelation of Jesus Christ.
13 For you have heard of my former conduct in Judaism, that I
exceedingly persecuted the church of God and laid it waste;
14 and I made progress in Judaism beyond many of my own age in
my nation, being exceedingly a zealot for the traditions of my fathers.
15 But when he that set me apart from my mother’s womb, and called
me through his grace, was pleased
16 to reveal his Son in me that I might preach him among the
Gentiles, immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood;
17 neither went I up to Jerusalem to those who were apostles before
me; but I went away into Arabia, and returned again to Damascus.
18 Then after three years, I went up to Jerusalem to become
acquainted with Cephas; and I abode with him fifteen days;
19 but another of the apostles saw I not, except James the brother of
the Lord.
20 Now as to the things that I write to you, behold, in the presence of
God I lie not.
21 After that I came into the regions of Syria and Cilicia,The H. T. Anderson New Testament
335
22 but was not known personally to the churches of Judea that were
in Christ;
23 but they had only heard that he that once persecuted us now
preaches the faith which he once destroyed;
24 and they glorified God in me.
Galatians 2
1 Then, fourteen years after, I again went up to Jerusalem, with
Barnabas, taking with me Titus also;
2 but I went up according to a revelation, and laid before them the
gospel that I preach among the Gentiles, but privately to them that
were of reputation, lest I should run or had run in vain.
3 But neither Titus, who was with me, being a Greek, was compelled
to be circumcised;
4 but* because of brethren that were stealthily brought in, who had
come in stealthily to spy out our freedom which we have in Christ
Jesus, that they might bring us into bondage:
* Supply: The matter concerning Titus took place.
5 to whom, not even for an hour, did we yield by subjection, that the
truth of the gospel might abide with you.
6 But from those that seemed to be something, whatever they were is
a matter of no importance with me; God accepts not the person of a
man; for to me those that seemed to be something added nothing:
7 but, on the other hand, seeing that I had been entrusted with the
gospel of the uncircumcision, as Peter with that of the circumcision;
8 for he that wrought mightily in Peter for the apostleship of the
circumcision, wrought mightily in me also for the Gentiles;
9 and, knowing the grace that had been given to me, James and
Cephas and John, who seemed to be pillars, gave to me and Barnabas
the right hand of fellowship, that we should go to the Gentiles, but
they to the circumcision:
10 only that we should remember the poor, which very thing I have
also been diligent to do.
11 But when Cephas came to Antioch, I withstood him to the face,
because he had been blamed.
12 For before some had come from James, he ate with the Gentiles;
but when they had come, he withdrew and separated himself, fearing
those of the circumcision;
13 and the rest of the Jews also acted hypocritically with him, so that
Barnabas also was carried away with their hypocrisy.
14 But when I saw that they walked not uprightly with the truth of
the gospel, I said to Cephas before them all: If thou, being a Jew,
livest as a Gentile and not as a Jew, why dost thou compel the
Gentiles to live as the Jews?336
Codex Sinaiticus:
15 We who are Jews by nature and not sinners of the Gentiles,
16 but knowing that a man is not justified by works of law, but
through faith of Christ Jesus, even we have believed on Christ Jesus,
that we might be justified by faith of Christ, and not by works of law;
because by works of law shall no flesh be justified.
17 But if in seeking to be justified in Christ we are found even
ourselves to be sinners, is Christ then a minister of sin? it can not be.
18 For if I build again those things that I have destroyed, I constitute
myself a transgressor.
19 For through law I died to law, that I might live to God.
20 With Christ have I been crucified: I live; however, no longer I, but
Christ lives in me; and the life that I now live in the flesh, I live in the
faith of the Son of God, who loved me and delivered himself up for
me.
21 I do not set aside the grace of God; for if righteousness is through
law, then Christ has died in vain.
Galatians 3
1 O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you, before whose eyes
Jesus Christ has been set forth among you as crucified?
2 This only I wish to learn of you, by works of law did you receive the
Spirit, or by the message of faith?
3 Are you so foolish? Haying begun in spirit, are you now made
perfect in flesh?
4 Have you suffered so many things in vain? If indeed it be yet in
vain.
5 He then that supplies to you the Spirit, and works mighty deeds
among you, is it by works of law or by the message of faith?
6 As Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for
righteousness.
7 Know you then that they that are of faith, these are sons of
Abraham.
8 But the Scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles by
faith, preached beforehand the gospel to Abraham: In thee shall all
the nations be blessed.
9 So then they that are of faith are blessed with believing Abraham.
10 For as many as are of works of law, are under a curse; for it is
written: Cursed is every one that abides not in all things that are
written in the book of the law, to do them.
11 But that in law no one is justified with God is evident; because the
just by faith shall live;
12 and the law is not of faith, but he that does them shall live in them.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
337
13 Christ has bought us off from the curse of the law, having become
a curse for us; for it is written: Cursed is every one that hangs on a
tree;
14 that upon the Gentiles the blessing of Abraham might come in
Christ Jesus, that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through
faith.
15 Brethren, I speak as a man. No one sets aside or adds to a
covenant when confirmed, though it be a man’s.
16 Now to Abraham were the promises spoken and to his offspring. It
does not say: And to offsprings, as of many, but as of one: And to thy
offspring, who is Christ.
17 But this I say: A covenant confirmed by God, the law which was
four hundred and thirty years after does not annul, so as to make the
promise of no effect.
18 For if the inheritance is of law, it is no longer of promise; but God
has given it as a favor to Abraham through promise.
19 Why then the law? Because of transgressions was it added, till the
offspring should come, to whom the promise has been made, having
been appointed through angels, in the hand of a mediator.
20 Now there is no mediator of one, but God is one.
21 Is the law then against the promises of God? It cannot be. For if a
law had been given that could have made alive, verily righteousness
would have been by law:
22 but the Scripture has shut up all under sin, that the promise by
faith of Jesus Christ might be given to those that believe.
23 But before faith came we were kept in guard under law, shut up
for the faith that was to be revealed.
24 So, then, the law was our pedagogue* to Christ, that we might be
justified by faith;
* Pedagogue—a servant that led his master’s children to school.
25 but since faith has come we are no longer under a pedagogue.
26 For you are sons of God through faith in Christ Jesus;
27 for as many of you as were baptized into Christ, put on Christ.
28 There is not Jew, neither Greek; there is not servant, neither
freeman; there is not male and female; for you are all one in Christ
Jesus.
29 But if you are Christ’s, then are you Abraham’s posterity, heirs
according to promise.
Galatians 4
1 But I say, as long as the heir is a minor, he differs nothing from a
servant, though he is lord of all;338
Codex Sinaiticus:
2 but is under tutors and stewards till the time appointed by the
father.
3 So also we, when we were minors, were in bondage under the
elements of the world;
4 but when the fulness of the time had come. God sent forth his Son,
born of a woman, born under law,
5 that he might buy off those under law, that we might receive the
adoption of sons.
6 And because you are sons. God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son
into our hearts, crying: Abba, Father.
7 So then thou art no longer a servant, but a son; and if a son, an heir
also through God.
8 But then, indeed, not having known God, you were in bondage to
them that by nature are not gods:
9 now, however, having known God, rather having been known by
God, how turn you again to the weak and poor elements, to which
you desire again to be in bondage?
10 You observe days and months and seasons and years.
11 I am afraid of you lest perhaps I have bestowed on you labor in
vain.
12 Brethren, I beseech you, become as I am, for I was as you are. You
have injured me in nothing;
13 but you know that because of weakness of the flesh I preached to
you the gospel formerly,
14 and my trial that is in my flesh you did not despise, neither loathe,
but you received me as an angel of God, as Christ Jesus.
15 What, then, was your happiness? for I testify for you that if
possible you would have pulled out your eyes and given them to me.
16 So, then, have I become your enemy because I tell you the truth?
17 They are zealous for you, not honorably: yes, they desire to
exclude you, that you may be zealous for them.
18 But it is honorable to be zealous in what is honorable, always, and
not only when I am present with you.
19 My little children, for whom I again suffer the pains of childbirth
till Christ be; formed in you,
20 I was wishing, however, to be, present with you now, and to
change my voice, for I am in doubt with regard to you.
21 Tell me, you that desire to be under law, do you not understand
the law?
22 for it is written that Abraham had two sons, one by the
maidservant and one by the free woman.
23 But the one by the maidservant was born according to the flesh,
that by the free woman through the promise.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
339
24 Which things are allegorized; for these are two covenants, one
indeed from Mount Sinai, bringing forth for bondage, which is
Hagar.
25 For this Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia, and corresponds to the
present Jerusalem, for she is in bondage with her children.
26 But the Jerusalem above is free, which is the mother of us all;
27 for it is written: Rejoice, thou barren that bearest not, break forth
and cry out, thou that travailest not, for many more are the children
of the deserted, than of her that had the husband.
28 But you, brethren, as Isaac, are children of promise.
29 But as then he that was born according to the flesh persecuted
him that was born according to the spirit, so also now.
30 But what says the Scripture? Cast out the maidservant and her
son; for the son of the maidservant shall not be heir with the son of
the free woman.
31 Wherefore, brethren, we are not children of the maidservant, but
of the free woman.
Galatians 5
1 In the freedom with which Christ has freed us, stand fast, and be
not again subject to the yoke of bondage.
2 Behold, I Paul say to you, that if you be circumcised, Christ shall
profit you nothing.
3 But I testify again to every man that is circumcised, that he is a
debtor to do the whole law.
4 You have withdrawn from Christ, whoever of you are justified in
law: you have fallen from grace.
5 For we, through the Spirit, by faith wait for the hope of
righteousness.
6 For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails anything, nor
uncircumcision, but faith working through love.
7 You were running well: who hindered you, that you should not obey
the truth?
8 The credulity is not of him that calls you.
9 A little leaven leavens the whole mass.
10 I have confidence in you in the Lord, that you will have no other
mind; but he that troubles you shall bear the condemnation, whoever
he be.
11 But I, brethren, if I yet preach circumcision, why am I yet
persecuted? Then has the offense of the cross ceased.
12 I would that they that subvert you would even cut themselves off.340
Codex Sinaiticus:
13 For you, brethren, were called for freedom: only use not your
freedom as an occasion for the flesh, but through love serve one
another.
14 For the whole law has been fulfilled in one word, in this: Thou
shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.
15 But if you bite and devour one another, see that you be not
destroyed one by another.
16 But, I say, walk in the Spirit and you shall not fulfill the desire of
the flesh.
17 For the flesh has desires against the Spirit, and the Spirit against
the flesh; and these array themselves one against the other, so that
you can not do the things that you would.
18 But if you are led by the Spirit, you are not under law.
19 But the works of the flesh are manifest, which are lewdness,
uncleanness, wantonness,
20 idolatry, witchcraft, enmities, strife, emulation, wraths,
contentions, divisions, heresies,
21 envyings, drunkenness, revellings, and things like these; as to
which I foretell you as I have also said before, that those that do such
things shall not inherit the kingdom of God.
22 But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith,
23 meekness, self-control: against such things there is no law.
24 But they that are Christ Jesus’ have crucified the flesh with the
passions and the desires.
25 If we live in the Spirit, in the Spirit also let us walk.
26 Become not vainglorious, provoking one another, envying one
another.
Galatians 6
1 Brethren, if a man shall have been also overtaken in any fault, do
you that are spiritual restore such a one in the spirit of meekness,
considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted.
2 Bear the griefs of one another, and so fulfil the law of Christ.
3 For if any one thinks himself to be something, being nothing, he
deceives himself. But let each one prove his own work, and then shall
he have cause of boasting in regard to himself, and not in regard to
another:
5 for each one shall bear his own burden.
6 But let him that is instructed in the word communicate to him that
instructs, in all good things.
7 Be not deceived, God is not mocked. For whatever a man sows, this
also shall he reap;The H. T. Anderson New Testament
341
8 for he that sows for his own flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption,
but he that sows for the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life eternal.
9 But let us not be weary in doing that which is beautiful; for in the
proper time we shall reap, if we faint not.
10 Therefore, as we I have opportunity, let us do good to all, but
especially to those of the household of faith.
11 See in how large letters* I have written to you with my own hand.
* The form of the Greek requires us to understand that Paul
wrote in large letters for emphasis, as we sometimes use capitals.
12 As many as wish to make a fair show in the flesh, these compel you
to be circumcised, only that they are not persecuted for the cross of
Christ.
13 For neither do they themselves that are circumcised keep the law,
but they wish you to be circumcised that they may glory in your flesh.
14 But may it not happen to me that I glory except in the cross of our
Lord Jesus Christ, through whom the world has been crucified to me,
and I to the world;
15 for neither circumcision is anything, nor uncircumcision, but a
new creature.
16 And as many as walk by this rule, peace upon them and mercy,
and upon the Israel of God.
17 Finally, let no one give me trouble; for I bear in my body the
marks of Jesus.
18 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, brethren:
amen.342
Codex Sinaiticus:
Paul to the Ephesians
Ephesians 1
1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through the will of God, to the
saints that are [in Ephesus] and to the faithful in Christ Jesus.
2 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus
Christ.
3 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
blessed us in every spiritual blessing in the heavenly things in Christ,
4 as he chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that we
should be holy and without blame before him,
5 having in love predestinated us for the adoption of sons to himself
through Jesus Christ, according to the good pleasure of his will,
6 for the praise of the glory of his grace, in which he has graced us in
the Beloved,
7 in whom we, have redemption through his blood, the remission of
offenses, according to the riches of his grace,
8 which he made to abound to us in all wisdom and prudence,
9 having made known to us the mystery of his will, according to his
good pleasure which he purposed in himself,
10 for a dispensation of the fulness of the seasons, to gather together
for himself all things in Christ, things in the heavens and things on
the earth, in him,
11 in whom also we have obtained inheritance, being predestinated
according to the purpose of him who works all things according to
the counsel of his will,
12 in order that we should be for the praise of his glory, who before
trusted in Christ:
13 in whom you also trusted, having heard the word of truth, the
gospel of your salvation, in whom also having believed, you were
sealed with the Spirit of promise, the Holy,
14 who is the earnest of our inheritance in order to the redemption of
the purchased possession, for the praise of his glory.
15 Wherefore I also, having heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus, and
your love for all the saints,
16 cease not to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my
prayers,
17 that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may
give to you the spirit of wisdom and of revelation in the
acknowledgment of him,
18 that the eyes of your heart being enlightened, you may know what
is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his
inheritance in the saints,The H. T. Anderson New Testament
343
19 and what the exceeding greatness of his power toward us that
believe according to the energy of the might of his strength,
20 which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead,
and caused him to sit at his right hand in the heavenly places,
21 far above every principality and authority and power and lordship
and every name that is named, not only in this age, but also in that to
come,
22 and subjected all things under his feet, and gave him as the head
over all things to the church,
23 which is his body, the fulness of him that fills all in all.
Ephesians 2
1 And you being dead to your offences and sins,
2 in which you formerly walked according to the age of this world,
according to the prince of the authority of the air, the spirit that now
works in the sons of disobedience,
3 among whom we all also lived formerly in the desires of our flesh,
doing the wishes of the flesh and of the mind, and were by nature
children of wrath as the rest also;
4 but God being rich in mercy, because of his great love with which
he loved us,
5 even us being dead to offenses he made alive with Christ — by grace
are you saved —
6 and raised us up and made us sit together in the heavenly places in
Christ Jesus,
7 that he might show in the ages to come the exceeding riches of his
grace in kindness to us in Christ Jesus.
8 For by grace are you saved through faith; and this not of you, the
gift of God;
9 not of works, lest any one should boast;
10 for we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good
works, which God prepared beforehand that we should walk in them.
11 Wherefore remember that formerly you Gentiles in the flesh —
who are called Uncircumcision by that called Circumcision in the
flesh, made with hands —
12 that you were at that time without Christ, alienated from the polity
of Israel, and strangers to the covenants of promise, not having hope,
and without God in the world;
13 but now in Christ Jesus you, who were formerly far off, have
become near in the blood of Christ.
14 For he is our peace, who has made both one, and broken down the
middle wall of separation,344
Codex Sinaiticus:
15 the enmity, having in his flesh caused to cease the law of
commandments in ordinances, that the two he might create in
himself one, a new man, making peace;
16 and might reconcile both in one body to God through the cross,
having in it put to death the enmity;
17 and he came and preached peace to you the far off, and peace to
the near,
18 for through him we both have access in one Spirit to the Father.
19 Therefore, then, you are no longer strangers and foreigners, but
you are fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the household of God,
20 having been built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets,
Christ Jesus himself being the chief cornerstone;
21 in whom all the building fitly framed together grows into a holy
temple in the Lord:
22 in whom you also are builded together for a dwelling-place of God
in Spirit.
Ephesians 3
1 For this cause I Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus for you Gentiles,
2 if indeed you have heard of the dispensation of the grace of God,
which was given to me for you,
3 that according to revelation was made known to me the mystery, as
I wrote before in brief,
4 by which you may be able, when you read, to understand my
knowledge in the mystery of Christ;
5 which in other generations was not made known to the sons of
men, as it is now revealed to his holy apostles and prophets in the
Spirit:
6 that the Gentiles should be fellowheirs, and of the same body, and
partakers of the promise in Christ Jesus through the gospel,
7 of which I became a minister according to the gift of the grace of
God, which was given to me according to the energy of his power.
8 To me who am far the least of all the saints was this grace given,
that I might preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of
Christ,
9 to enlighten all men as to what is the dispensation of the mystery
that has been hid from the ages in God, who created all things;
10 that there might be made known now to the principalities and the
authorities in the heavenly regions, through the church, the much-
diversified wisdom of God,
11 according to the purpose of the ages, which he established in
Christ Jesus our Lord,The H. T. Anderson New Testament
345
12 in whom we have boldness and access in confidence through the
faith of him.
13 Wherefore I beseech that you faint not in my afflictions for you,
which are your glory.
14 For this cause I bow my knees to the Father,
15 from whom all the family in the heavens and on the earth is
named,
16 that he may grant to you according to the riches of his glory, that
with power you may receive strength, through the Spirit, into the
inner man,
17 that Christ may dwell, through faith, in your hearts,
18 that you, being rooted and founded in love, may be able to
comprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and
depth and height,
19 and to know the love of Christ that passes knowledge, that you
may be filled to* all the fulness of God.
* That is, till you attain to the fulness of God.
20 Now to him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that
we ask or think, according to the power that works in us,
21 to him be glory in the church in Christ Jesus through all the
generations of the age of ages: amen.
Ephesians 4
1 I therefore the prisoner in the Lord beseech you, that you walk in a
manner worthy of the calling with which you were called;
2 with all lowliness of mind and meekness, with longsuffering,
bearing with one another in love:
3 giving diligence to keep the oneness of the Spirit in the bond of
peace.
4 One body and one Spirit, even as you were called in one hope of
your calling;
5 one Lord, one faith, one baptism:
6 one God and Father of all, who is over all and through all and in all.
7 But to each one of us was given grace according to the measure of
the gift of Christ.
8 Wherefore he says: Having ascended on high he led captivity
captive and gave gifts to men.
9 But this: He ascended; what is it but that he also descended into
the lower regions of the earth?
10 He that descended is the same that ascended far above all the
heavens, that he might fill all things.
11 And he gave some apostles, some prophets, some evangelists,
some pastors, and teachers,346
Codex Sinaiticus:
12 for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the
building up of the body of Christ,
13 till we all come into the oneness of the faith, and of the
acknowledgment of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to the measure
of the stature of the fulness of Christ;
14 that we be no longer children, tossed and carried about by every
wind of teaching in the sleight of men, in craftiness used with a view
to the art of deception:
15 but speaking truth in love may grow up into him in all things, who
is the head, Christ;
16 from whom all the body, fitly framed together and compacted
through every joint of supply, according to the energy in the measure
of each part, makes increase of the body for the building up of itself
in love.
17 This I say, therefore, and testify in the Lord, that you walk no
longer as the rest of the Gentiles also walk in the vanity of their mind,
18 being darkened in understanding, alienated from the life of God,
because of the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardness of
their heart:
19 who, being past feeling, have delivered themselves up to
lasciviousness for the working of all uncleanness in their greediness.
20 But you did not so learn Christ,
21 if indeed you heard him and in him were taught as the truth is in
Jesus,
22 that you put off, according to the former behavior, the old man
who is corrupt according to the deceitful desires;
23 but be renewed in the spirit of your mind,
24 and put on the new man which, according to God, has been
created in righteousness and holiness of truth.
25 Wherefore having put away what is false, speak truth each one
with his neighbor; for we are members one of another.
26 Be angry and sin not: let not the sun go down upon your wrath,
27 neither give place to the devil.
28 Let him that steals, steal no more, but rather let him labor,
making with his hands that which is good, that he may have to
distribute to him that has need.
29 Let no corrupt word proceed out of your mouth, but if any is good
for needful edification, that may give grace to the hearers.
30 And grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, in which you have been
sealed for a day of redemption.
31 Let all bitterness, and anger, and wrath, and clamor, and
blasphemy, be taken away from you, with all malice.
32 But become kind one toward another, compassionate, forgiving
one another as God also in Christ forgave you.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
347
Ephesians 5
1 Become, therefore, imitators of God, as beloved children,
2 and walk in love, as Christ also loved us, and delivered himself up
for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for an odor of a sweet smell.
3 But lewdness, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let them not be
named among you, as it becomes saints,
4 and filthiness and foolish talking or jesting, which are not
becoming, but rather giving of thanks.
5 For this you know, that no lewd, or unclean person, or covetous
man, who is an idolater, has inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and
of God.
6 Let no one deceive you with vain words; for because of these things
comes the wrath of God upon the sons of disobedience.
7 Become not therefore partakers with them.
8 For you were formerly darkness, but now light in the Lord: walk as
children of light —
9 for the fruit of light is in all goodness and righteousness and truth
—
10 proving what is acceptable to the Lord;
11 and have no communication with the unfruitful works of darkness,
but rather even reprove them.
12 For the things done by them in secret, it is a shame even to speak
of; but all things that are reproved are made manifest by light; for
everything that is made manifest is light.
14 Wherefore he says: Awake, thou that sleepest, and rise from the
dead, and Christ shall give thee light.
15 See, therefore, how exactly you walk, not as unwise, but as wise,
16 redeeming the time, because the days are evil.
17 Therefore become not foolish, but understand what the will of the
Lord is.
18 And be not drunk with wine, in which is revelry; but be filled in
Spirit;
19 speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs;
singing and chanting in your heart to the Lord;
20 giving thanks always to the God and Father for all things, in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ:
21 being subject one to another in the fear of Christ.
22 Let wives be subject to their own husbands as to the Lord;
23 for the husband is the head of the wife, as Christ also is the head
of the church, himself the saviour of the body.
24 But as the church is subject to Christ, so also the wives to their
husbands in everything.348
Codex Sinaiticus:
25 Husbands, love your wives, as Christ also loved the church, and
delivered himself up for it,
26 that he might sanctify it, having cleansed it by the bath of water in
the word,
27 that himself might present to himself the glorious church, not
having spot or wrinkle or any such thing, but that it should be holy
and without blemish.
28 So ought men to love their own wives as their own bodies. He that
loves his wife loves himself;
29 for no one ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes and
cherishes it, as Christ also the church;
30 for we are members of his body, of his flesh and of his bones.
31 For this cause shall a man leave father and mother and be joined
to his wife, and the two shall I be one flesh.
32 This mystery is great; but I speak in regard to Christ and the
church.
33 Nevertheless, do you each one of you so love his own wife as
himself, and let the wife see that she reverence her husband.
Ephesians 6
1 Children, obey your parents in the Lord; for this is right.
2 Honor thy father and mother, which is the first commandment
with a promise,
3 that it may be well with thee, and thou mayest live long on the
earth.
4 And, you fathers, provoke not your children to wrath, but bring
them up in the training and admonition of the Lord.
5 Servants, obey your masters according to the flesh, with fear and
trembling, in the simplicity of your heart as to Christ;
6 not according to eye-service as pleasing men, but as servants of
Christ, doing the will of God from the soul;
7 with good will doing service as to the Lord and not to men:
8 knowing that whatever good thing any one does, for this he shall
receive from the Lord, whether he be bond or free.
9 And, you masters, do the same thing towards them, forbearing
threatening, knowing that the Lord of both them and of you is in the
heavens, and there is no respect of persons with him.
10 Finally, be strong in the Lord and in the might of his strength.
11 Put on the whole armor of God, so that you may be able to stand
against the wiles of the devil;
12 for we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against the
principalities, against the authorities, against the world rulers of this
darkness, against bands of wicked spirits in the heavenly regions.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
349
13 Wherefore take up the whole armor of God, that you may be able
to withstand in the evil day, and having wrought out all things, to
stand.
14 Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and
having put on the breastplate of righteousness,
15 and having your feet shod with the readiness of the gospel of
peace;
16 over all taking up the shield of faith, with which you shall be able
to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked one.
17 And receive the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit,
which is the word of God;
18 through every prayer and supplication, praying at every season in
spirit, and in it being watchful in all perseverance and supplication
for all the saints,
19 and for me, that speech may be given to me in the opening of my
mouth, that I may in boldness make known the mystery of the
gospel,
20 for which I am an ambassador in a chain, that in it I may speak
boldly as I ought to speak.
21 But that you also may know my affairs, how I do, Tychicus, the
beloved brother and faithful minister in the Lord, will make known
all things to you:
22 whom I have sent to you for this very purpose, that you may know
what concerns us, and that he may comfort your hearts.
23 Peace to the brethren and love with faith from God the Father and
the Lord Jesus Christ.
24 Grace with all those that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity.350
Codex Sinaiticus:
Paul to the Philippians
Philippians 1
1 Paul and Timothy, servants of Christ Jesus, to all the saints in
Christ Jesus, that are in Philippi, with the bishops and deacons.
2 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus
Christ.
3 I thank my God on every remembrance of you,
4 always in every prayer of mine for you all making request with joy,
5 for your contribution for the gospel from the first day till now,
6 having confidence in this very thing, that he that began a good
work in you will accomplish it till the day of Christ Jesus,
7 as it is right for me to think this of you all, because I have you in my
heart, that all of you are both in my bonds and in my defense and
confirmation of the gospel, partakers of my grace.
8 For God is my witness, how I long after you all in the bowels of
Christ Jesus.
9 And I pray for this, that your love may abound yet more and more
in all knowledge and understanding,
10 that you prove the things that are excellent, that you may be pure
and without offense to the day of Christ,
11 having been filled with the fruit of righteousness, which is through
Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of God.
12 But I wish you to know, brethren, that what has happened to me
has turned out rather to the furtherance of the gospel,
13 so that my bonds have become manifest in Christ in the whole of
the pretorium, and in all other places,
14 and the greater number of the brethren in the Lord, having
confidence in my bonds, are more abundantly bold to speak the word
without fear.
15 Some both because of envy and strife, some also because of good
will, preach Christ:
16 the one part from love, knowing that I am appointed to the
defense of the gospel,
17 the other from contention announce Christ not sincerely, thinking
to awake affliction to my bonds.
18 What then? Yet in every way, whether in pretense or in truth,
Christ is announced, and in this I rejoice. Yes, and I will rejoice;
19 for I know that this will turn out to me for salvation through your
prayer and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ,
20 according to my earnest expectations and hope that in nothing
shall I be ashamed, but in all boldness, as at all times, even nowThe H. T. Anderson New Testament
351
Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether through life or
through death.
21 For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.
22 But if to live in the flesh, this is the fruit of my work, and what I
shall choose I know not.
23 But I am in a strait between two, having the desire to depart and
be with Christ; for this is far better:
24 yet to abide in the flesh is more needful for you.
25 And having this confidence, I know that I shall abide and continue
with you all for your advancement, and the joy of your faith,
26 that your rejoicing may be abundant in Christ Jesus, in me,
through my coming again to you.
27 Only conduct yourselves in a manner worthy of the gospel of
Christ, that whether I come and see you or be absent I shall hear of
your affairs, that you stand fast in one spirit, with one soul striving
together for the faith of the gospel,
28 and in nothing terrified by the adversaries, which is to them an
evident token of perdition, but of your salvation, and this from God;
29 for to you has been graciously given in behalf of Christ, not only to
believe on him, but also to suffer for him,
30 having the same contest which you saw in me and now hear to be
in me.
Philippians 2
1 If therefore there is any exhortation in Christ, if any comfort of love,
if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies,
2 fulfil my joy that you think the same thing, having the same love,
being of one soul, thinking the one thing,
3 nothing according to contention, neither according to vainglory,
but in lowliness of mind esteeming one another better than
yourselves,
4 not considering each of you your own things, but each of you also
the things of others.
5 For let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus,
6 who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal
with God,
7 but he emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, having been
born in the likeness of men; and found in fashion as a man,
8 he humbled himself, having become obedient even to death, and
the death of the cross.
9 Wherefore God also highly exalted him and gave him a name that is
above every name,352
Codex Sinaiticus:
10 that in the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of those in the
heavens and those on the earth and those under the earth,
11 and every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the
glory of God the Father.
12 So then, my beloved, as you have always obeyed, not as in my
presence only, but now much more in my absence, with fear and
trembling work out your own salvation;
13 for it is God that works in you both to will and to work for* his
good pleasure.
*That is, because he is pleased so to do.
14 Do all things without murmurings and disputings,
15 that you may become blameless and harmless, children of God,
unrebukable in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation,
among whom you shine as lights in the world,
16 holding forth the word of life, for my rejoicing till the day of
Christ, that I ran not in vain, neither labored in vain.
17 But if I am even poured out upon the sacrifice and service of your
faith, I rejoice, and rejoice with you all;
18 and for the same do you also rejoice, and rejoice with me.
19 But I trust in the Lord to send Timothy to you soon, that I may be
of good cheer by knowing of your affairs.
20 For I have no one of a like soul, who will sincerely care for your
affairs;
21 for all seek their own, not the things of Christ Jesus.
22 But you know the proof of him, that as a child for a father he
served with me for the gospel.
23 Him therefore I hope to send as soon as I know certainly of my
matters;
24 but I have confidence in the Lord that I myself also will come
soon.
25 But I thought it needful to send to you Epaphroditus, my brother
and fellow-worker and fellow-soldier, but your apostle and minister
to my need,
26 because he was longing after you all and greatly grieved, because
you had heard that he was sick.
27 For he was sick near to death; but God had mercy on him, and not
on him only, but on me also, that I might not have sorrow on sorrow.
28 More diligently therefore did I send him, that on seeing him again
you might rejoice and I be less sorrowful.
29 Receive him therefore in the Lord with all joy, and hold such in
honor.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
353
30 for because of the work he came near to death, not regarding his
life, that he might fill up that which was wanting of your service to
me.
Philippians 3
1 Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord. To write the same things
to you, to me indeed is not burdensome, but for you it is safe.
2 Beware of the dogs, beware of the evil-workers, beware of the
concision.
3 For we are the circumcision, who worship God in spirit, and glory
in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh,
4 though indeed I have confidence in the flesh. If any other one
thinks that he has confidence in the flesh, I more:
5 circumcised the eighth day, of the race of Israel, of the tribe of
Benjamin, a Hebrew of the Hebrews, according to law a Pharisee,
6 according to zeal persecuting the church, according to the
righteousness that is in law having been blameless.
7 But the things that were gain to me, these I have counted loss for
Christ.
8 Yes, indeed, then I even count all things to be loss for the
excellence of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I
suffered the loss of all things, and count them to be refuse, that I may
gain Christ,
9 and be found in him, not having my righteousness which is of law,
but that through faith of Christ, the righteousness of God on faith,
10 that I may know him and the power of his resurrection and the
fellowship of his sufferings, being conformed to his death.
11 if by any means I may attain to the resurrection from the dead.
12 Not that I have already grasped [the prize] or have already become
perfect, but I am pursuing if I also may apprehend, because I was
also apprehended by Christ.
13 Brethren, I count not myself to have apprehended;
14 but one thing I do; forgetting the things that are behind, and
stretching myself forward to those that are before, I press along the
mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.
15 Let us therefore, as many as are perfect, have this mind; and if as
to anything you have a different mind. God will reveal even this to
you;
16 but to what we have attained, walk by the same.
17 Become imitators of me, brethren, and consider those that so
walk, as you have us for an example.
18 For many walk, of whom I told you, and now tell you, even
weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ,354
Codex Sinaiticus:
19 whose end is destruction, whose god is their belly, and whose
glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things.
20 For our commonwealth is in the heavens, whence we look for a
Saviour, also the Lord Jesus Christ,
21 who shall transform the body of our humiliation, that it may be
like the body of his glory, according to the energy of his ability, even
to subdue all things to himself.
Philippians 4
1 So then, my brethren beloved and longed for, my joy and my crown,
so stand fast in the Lord, beloved.
2 I exhort Euodia and I exhort Syntyche, that they have the same
mind in the Lord.
3 Yes, I beseech thee also, true yokefellow, aid these women, who
aided me in the gospel, with Clement also and the rest of my fellow-
laborers, whose names are in the book of life.
4 Rejoice in the Lord always: again I say: Rejoice.
5 Let your moderation be known to all men: the Lord is near.
6 Be anxious for nothing, but in everything, by prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known to
God.
7 And the peace of God, which passes all understanding, shall keep
your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.
8 Finally, brethren, whatever things are true, whatever honorable,
whatever right, whatever pure, whatever lovely, whatever of good
report, if there is any virtue, and if any praise, think on these things;
9 what things you have both learned and received and heard and
seen in me, these do; and the God of peace shall be with you.
10 But I rejoiced in the Lord greatly, that now at length you have
flourished* in your care for me; in which you also cared, but lacked
opportunity.
*A figure from the putting forth of leaves.
11 Not that I speak in respect to want; for I have learned in what
condition I am to be content.
12 I know how to be abased, I know also how to abound: in
everything and in all things I have been instructed, both to be full
and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer want.
13 I have strength for all things in him that gives me power.
14 Nevertheless you did well in communicating with my affliction.
15 But you also know, Philippians, that in the beginning of the
gospel, when I departed from Macedonia, no church communicated
with me as to an account of giving and receiving, but you only;
16 for even in Thessalonica you sent once and again to my need.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
355
17 Not that I desire the gift, but I desire fruit that may abound to your
account.
18 But I have all in full and abound; I have been filled, having
received of Epaphroditus your gifts, an odor of a sweet smell, a
sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to God.
19 But my God will fill all your need according to his riches in glory in
Christ Jesus.
20 Now to our God and Father be glory from age to age. Amen.
21 Salute every saint in Christ Jesus. The brethren that are with me
salute you.
22 All the saints salute you, but especially they of Caesar’s household.
23 The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.356
Codex Sinaiticus:
Paul to the Colossians
Colossians 1
1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through the will of God, and
Timothy the brother,
2 to the saints that are in Colossae and the faithful brethren in Christ.
Grace to you and peace from God our Father.
3 We thank God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, praying always
for you,
4 since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus and the love you have
for all the saints,
5 because of the hope that is laid up for you in the heavens, of which
you heard before in the word of the truth of the gospel,
6 which is present among you, as also in all the world, and is bringing
forth fruit and increasing as also among you, from the day you heard
and knew the grace of God in truth:
7 as you learned from Epaphras, our beloved fellow-servant, who is
faithful in behalf of you, a minister of Christ,
8 who also made known to us your love in the Spirit.
9 Wherefore we also, from the day we heard, cease not to pray for
you and to ask that you may be filled with the knowledge of his will in
all wisdom and spiritual understanding,
10 so that you walk in a manner worthy of the Lord, to all pleasing, in
every good work bringing forth fruit and increasing in the knowledge
of God,
11 in all power made powerful according to the might of his glory for
all patience and longsuffering, with joy,
12 giving thanks to the Father who made us fit for the portion of the
inheritance of the saints in light,
13 who delivered us from the authority of darkness and translated us
into the kingdom of the Son of his love,
14 in whom we have redemption, the remission of sins,
15 who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every
creature,
16 for in him were all things created that are in the heavens and that
are on the earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or lordships,
or principalities or authorities: all things have been created through
him and for him,
17 and he is before all things, and all things in him consist;
18 and he is the head of the body, and the church: who is the
beginning, the firstborn from the dead, that he himself might become
in all things pre-eminent;
19 for he was well pleased that all the fulness should dwell in himThe H. T. Anderson New Testament
357
20 and through him to reconcile all things to himself, having made
peace through the blood of his cross, through him, whether things on
the earth or things in the heavens;
21 and you being formerly alienated and enemies in mind in the
wicked works, now, however, he has reconciled
22 in the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy and
without fault and blameless in his presence;
23 if indeed you continue in faith founded and settled, and not
moved away from the hope of the gospel which you heard, which was
preached to every creature that is under heaven, of which I Paul
became a minister.
24 Now I rejoice in sufferings for you, and, in your stead, I fill up that
which remains of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his body’s
sake, which is the church,
25 of which I became a minister according to the dispensation of
God, which was given to me for you to fulfil the word of God,
26 the mystery that having been hid from the ages and from the
generations, now, however, has been made manifest to his saints,
27 to whom God wished to make known what is the riches of the
glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the
hope of glory,
28 whom we announce, admonishing every man and teaching every
man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ;
29 for which I also labor, striving according to his energy that is
active in me in power.
Colossians 2
1 For I wish you to know how great a conflict I have for you and those
in Laodicea and as many as have not seen my face in the flesh,
2 that their hearts may be comforted, they being knit together in love,
and for all the riches of the full assurance of understanding, for the
acknowledgment of the mystery of God,
3 in which are laid up all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge.
4 But this I say , that no one may beguile you with persuasive words.
5 For though in the flesh I am absent, yet in the spirit I am with you,
rejoicing and I beholding your order and the steadfastness of your
faith in Christ.
6 As therefore you received Christ Jesus the Lord, in him walk,
7 rooted and builded up in him and strengthened in the faith as you
were taught, abounding in it in thanksgiving.
8 Take care that there shall be no one that leads you astray through
philosophy and vain deceit, according to the tradition of men,
according to the rudiments of the world, and not according to Christ,
9 for in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily,358
Codex Sinaiticus:
10 and you are complete in him, who is the head of all principality
and authority,
11 in whom you were also circumcised with a circumcision made
without hands, in the putting off of the body of the flesh, in the
circumcision of Christ,
12 having been buried with him in baptism, in which you were also
raised with him through faith in the energy of God who raised him
from the dead;
13 and you being dead in the offenses and the uncircumcision of your
flesh, he made alive together with him, having forgiven us all
offenses;
14 having blotted out the handwriting in ordinances that was against
us, which was opposed to us, he also took it out of the midst, having
nailed it to the cross:
15 after spoiling principalities and authorities, he made a show of
them openly, having triumphed over them in it.
16 Let no one therefore judge you in eating or in drinking or in
respect of a feast or of a new moon or of sabbaths,
17 which are a shadow of things to come, but the body of Christ is the
substance.
18 Let no one deprive you of your reward by delighting in humility
and worship of angels, intruding into those things which he has not
seen, vainly puffed up by the mind of his flesh,
19 and not holding the head, from whom all the body, through joints
and bands, having nourishment, ministered and being knit together,
increases with the increase of God.
20 If you die with Christ from the rudiments of the world, why as
living in the world are you subject to dogmas, —
21 Touch not, neither taste nor handle, —
22 which things are all to perish in the using, according to the
commandments and teachings of men.
23 And these have indeed a show of wisdom in will-worship and
humility and austerity of the body, not in any honor for the satisfying
of the flesh.
Colossians 3
1 If then you were raised with Christ, seek the things that are above,
where Christ is sitting at the right hand of God:
2 think of things that are above, not of things that are on the earth.
3 For you died, and your life has been hid with Christ in God:
4 when Christ, our life, shall be made manifest, then shall you also be
made manifest with him in glory.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
359
5 Put to death therefore your members that are on the earth,
lewdness, uncleanness, passion, evil desire, and covetousness, which
is idolatry;
6 because of which things comes the wrath of God;
7 in which you also walked formerly when you lived in them;
8 but now do you also put off all these, anger, wrath, malice,
blasphemy, filthy speech out of your mouth:
9 lie not one to another, as you have put off the old man with his
deeds,
10 and have put on the new, that is renewed for knowledge according
to the image of him that created him,
11 where there is not Greek and Jew, circumcision and
uncircumcision, barbarian, Scythian, bondman, freeman, but Christ
is all and in all.
12 Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of
mercy, kindness, lowliness of mind, meekness, longsuffering,
13 bearing with one another and forgiving one another, if any one
have a quarrel with any, as Christ also forgave you, so also do you;
14 but over all these put on love, which is the bond of perfectness.
15 And let the peace of Christ reign in your hearts, to which you were
also called in one body, and become thankful.
16 Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all wisdom teaching
and admonishing each other, in psalms, hymns, spiritual songs, in
gratitude singing in your heart to God;
17 and everything whatever you do in word or in deed, do all in the
name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through
him.
18 Wives, be subject to your husbands, as it is fit in the Lord.
19 Husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter against them.
20 Children, obey your parents in all things; for this is well-pleasing
in the Lord.
21 Fathers, provoke not your children to anger, lest they be
discouraged.
22 Servants, obey in all things your masters according to the flesh,
not in eye-service, as pleasing men, but in simplicity of heart, fearing
the Lord.
23 Whatever you do, work from the soul as to the Lord, and not to
men,
24 knowing that from the Lord you shall receive the reward of the
inheritance. Serve the Lord Christ;
25 for he that does wrong shall receive for the wrong that he has
done, and there is no respect of persons.360
Codex Sinaiticus:
Colossians 4
1 Masters, give to your servants that which is just and equal, knowing
that you also have a Master in heaven,
2 Persevere in prayer, watching in it in thanksgiving,
3 praying at the same time also for us, that God would open for us a
door of the word to speak the mystery of Christ, for which I also have
been bound,
4 that I may make it manifest as I ought to speak.
5 Walk in wisdom toward those who are without, redeeming the
time.
6 Let your speech be always in grace, seasoned with salt, that you
may know of how you ought to answer every one.
7 All things that concern me will Tychicus, the beloved brother and to
faithful minister and fellow-servant in the Lord, make known to you,
8 whom I sent to you for this very purpose, that he may know your
state, and comfort your hearts,
9 and Onesimus, the faithful and beloved brother, who is of you; they
will make known all things here.
10 Aristarchus, my fellow-prisoner, salutes you, and so does Mark,
the nephew of Barnabas, concerning whom you received
commandments, —if he come to you, receive him,—
11 and Jesus who is called Justus, who are of the circumcision: these
only are my fellow-workers for the kingdom of God, who have been a
comfort to me.
12 Epaphras, who is of you, salutes you, a servant of Christ Jesus,
always striving for you in prayers, that you may stand perfect and
complete in all the will of God.
13 For I testify for him that he has great travail for you and for those
in Laodicea and those in Hierapolis.
14 Luke, the beloved physician, salutes you, and Demas.
15 Salute the brethren in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the church
that is in his house.
16 And when the epistle has been read among you, cause that it be
read also in the church of the Laodiceans, and see that you also read
that from Laodicea.
17 And say to Archippus: Take heed to the ministry which thou hast
received in the Lord, that thou fulfil it.
18 The salutation of Paul with my own hand. Remember my bonds.
Grace be with you.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
361362
Codex Sinaiticus:
Paul to the Thessalonians 1
1 Thessalonians 1
1 Paul and Silvanus and Timothy, to the church of the Thessalonians
in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. Grace to you and peace.
2 We thank God always for you all, making mention of you in our
prayers,
3 incessantly remembering your work of faith, and labor of love, and
patience of hope of our Lord Jesus Christ before our God and Father,
4 knowing, brethren beloved of God, your election,
5 because our gospel came not to you in word only, but also in power,
and in the Holy Spirit, and in much assurance, as you know what sort
of persons we were among you for your sake.
6 And you became imitators of us and of the Lord, having received
the word in much affliction with joy of the Holy Spirit,
7 so that you became a pattern to all that believe in Macedonia and in
Achaia.
8 For from you sounded out the word of the Lord not only in
Macedonia and Achaia, but in every place your faith toward God has
gone forth, so that we have no need to say anything;
9 for they themselves declare concerning us what manner of entrance
we had to you, and how you turned to God from the idols, to serve
the living and true God,
10 and to await his Son from the heavens, whom he raised from the
dead, Jesus, who delivers us from the coming wrath.
1 Thessalonians 2
1 For yourselves know, brethren, our entrance to you, that it has not
been vain;
2 but having suffered before, and having been outraged, as you know,
in Philippi, we were bold in our God to speak to you the gospel of
God in a great contest.
3 For our exhortation was not from delusion, neither from
uncleanness, nor in guile;
4 but as we have been approved by God to be intrusted with the
gospel, so we speak, not as pleasing men, but God, who proves our
hearts.
5 For neither used we at any time words of flattery, as you know; nor
a pretext of covetousness. God is witness;
6 neither sought we glory from men, neither from you nor from
others, when we could have been burdensome as Christ’s apostles;
7 but we were gentle in the midst of you, as if a nurse should nourish
her own children,The H. T. Anderson New Testament
363
8 so, having strong affection for you, we were well pleased to impart
to you, not only the gospel of God, but our own souls also, because
you had become dear to us.
9 For you remember, brethren, our labor and toil: working night and
day that we might not burden any one of you, we preached to you the
gospel of God.
10 You are witnesses, and God, how holily and righteously and
blamelessly we conducted ourselves for you that believe,
11 even as you know how we exhorted, and comforted, and charged
you, each one of you, as a father his own children,
12 that you should walk in a manner worthy of God, who calls you
into his own kingdom and glory.
13 And for this reason we also thank God without ceasing, because on
receiving from us the word of the message of God, you accepted not
the word of men, but as it is in truth the word of God, which also
works in you that believe.
14 For you, brethren, became imitators of the churches of God that
are in Judea in Christ Jesus; for you also suffered the same things
from your own countrymen, even as they have from the Jews,
15 who killed both the Lord Jesus and the prophets, and persecuted
us, and please not God, and are opposed to all men,
16 forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they may be saved, so
as to fill up their sins always. But the wrath has come upon them to
completion.
17 But we, brethren, having been bereaved and separated from you
for the space of an hour, in presence, not in heart, the more
abundantly endeavored to see your face with great desire.
18 Wherefore we wished to come to you, I Paul indeed, both once and
again, and Satan hindered us.
19 For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing, are not even
you before our Lord Jesus at his coming?
20 For you are our glory and joy.
1 Thessalonians 3
1 Wherefore, no longer enduring, we thought good to be left behind
in Athens alone,
2 and sent Timothy, our brother, and God’s fellow-workman in the
gospel of Christ, to establish you and exhort you concerning your
faith,
3 that no one should be moved in these afflictions. For yourselves
know that we are appointed to this:
4 for even when we were with you, we told you before that we are to
be afflicted, as it also came to pass, and you know.364
Codex Sinaiticus:
5 For this reason, I also, no longer enduring, sent to know your faith,
lest perhaps the tempter had tempted you, and our toil should have
been in vain.
6 But Timothy, having just now come to us from you, and brought us
good news of your faith and love, and that you have a good
remembrance of us always, greatly desiring to see us, even as we also
to see you,
7 for this reason we were comforted over you, brethren, in all our
distress and affliction through your faith;
8 for now we live if you stand fast in the Lord.
9 For what thanks can we render to God concerning you, for all the
joy with which we rejoice for your sakes before our God,
10 night and day praying exceedingly that we may see your face, and
complete what is lacking in your faith?
11 Now he himself, our God and Father, and our Lord Jesus, direct
our way to you;
12 and the Lord make you increase and abound in love toward one
another and toward all, even as we toward you,
13 in order that he may establish your hearts blameless in holiness
before our God and Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus with all
his holy ones.
1 Thessalonians 4
1 Finally then, brethren, we beseech you and exhort in the Lord
Jesus, that as you received from us how you ought to walk and please
God, even as you do walk, that you would abound the more.
2 For you know what precepts we gave you through the Lord Jesus.
3 For this is the will of God, your sanctification, that you abstain
from lewdness;
4 that each one of you know how to acquire for himself his own vessel
in sanctification and honor,
5 not in the passion of desire, even as the Gentiles who know not
God;
6 that no one go beyond and defraud in the matter his brother,
because the Lord is an avenger for all such things, as we also told you
before, and fully testified.
7 For God called us not for uncleanness, but in sanctification.
8 Therefore, he that rejects, rejects not man, but God, who also gave
his Holy Spirit to you.
9 But concerning brotherly love, you have no need that I write to you;
for you yourselves are taught of God to love one another;
10 for you also do it toward all the brethren that are in all Macedonia.
But we exhort you, brethren, to abound the more,The H. T. Anderson New Testament
365
11 and make it your honor to be quiet, and to do your own business,
and to work with your own hands, as we charged you;
12 that you may walk in a becoming manner toward those that are
without, and have need of nothing.
13 But we do not wish you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning those
that have fallen asleep, that you sorrow not as the rest also who have
no hope.
14 For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, so also those that
have fallen asleep, will God through Jesus bring with him.
15 For this we say to you in the word of the Lord, that we, the living,
who remain over to the coming of the Lord, shall not precede those
that have fallen asleep;
16 because the Lord himself, with a shout, with the voice of the
archangel, and with the trumpet of God, shall descend from heaven,
and the dead in Christ shall arise first;
17 then we, the living, who remain over, shall, together with them, be
caught away in clouds to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we
always be with the Lord.
18 So then comfort one another in these words.
1 Thessalonians 5
1 But concerning the times and the seasons, brethren, you have no
need that I write to you;
2 for yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so comes as a
thief in the night.
3 When they say: Peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes
upon them, as pain upon her that is with child, and they shall not
escape.
4 But you, brethren, are not in darkness, that the day should overtake
you as a thief;
5 for you all are sons of light and sons of day; we are not of night,
neither of darkness:
6 therefore let us not sleep as do also the rest, but let us watch and be
sober.
7 For those that sleep, sleep by night, and those that are drunk are
drunk by night;
8 but let us, as we are of day, be sober, having put on the breastplate
of faith and love, and as a helmet the hope of salvation;
9 because God did not appoint us to wrath, but to the obtaining of
salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ,
10 who died for us that, whether we be awake or asleep, we should
live together with him.
11 Wherefore comfort one another, and edify one the other, as you
also do.366
Codex Sinaiticus:
12 But we beseech you, brethren, to know those that labor among
you, and preside over you in the Lord, and admonish you,
13 and to esteem them very highly in love for their work’s sake. Be at
peace among yourselves.
14 But we exhort you, brethren, admonish the disorderly, encourage
the fainthearted, assist the weak, be longsuffering toward all.
15 See that no one render evil for evil to any one, but always pursue
that which is good, both toward one another and toward all.
16 Rejoice always,
17 pray without ceasing,
18 in everything give thanks; for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus
concerning you.
19 Quench not the Spirit,
20 despise not prophesyings.
21 But prove all things, hold fast the excellent:
22 abstain from every appearance of evil.
23 But may the God of peace himself sanctify you wholly, and entire
may your spirit and soul and body be kept without blame at the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
24 Faithful is he that calls you, who will also do it.
25 Brethren, pray for us.
26 Salute all the brethren with a holy kiss.
27 I adjure you by the Lore that the letter be read to all the holy
brethren.
28 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
367368
Codex Sinaiticus:
Paul to the Thessalonians 2
2 Thessalonians 1
1 Paul and Silvanus and Timothy to the church of the Thessalonians
in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
2 Grace to you and peace from God the Father and the Lord Jesus
Christ,
3 We are bound to give thanks to God always concerning you,
brethren, as it is fit, because your faith grows exceedingly, and the
love of each one of you all toward one another increases,
4 so that we ourselves glory in you among the churches of God, on
account of your patience and faith in all your persecutions and
afflictions which you endure,
5 a proof of the righteous judgment of God, that you may be counted
worthy of the kingdom of God, for which you also suffer,
6 since it is a righteous thing with God to repay to those that afflict
you, affliction,
7 and to you that are afflicted, rest with us, at the revelation of the
Lord Jesus from heaven with the angels of his power
8 in naming fire, rendering vengeance to those that know not God
and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus;
9 and these shall suffer punishment, an eternal destruction from the
presence of the Lord and from the glory of his might;
10 when he shall have come to be glorified in his saints, and to be
admired in all that believed (because our testimony to you was
believed) in that day.
11 To which end also we pray always for you, that our God may count
you worthy of the calling, and fulfill all the good pleasure of
goodness, and the work of faith in power,
12 that the name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you, and you
in him, according to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ.
2 Thessalonians 2
1 But we beseech you, brethren, in respect to the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and our gathering together to him,
2 that you be not so quickly shaken from the right understanding,
nor yet be troubled, neither through spirit, nor through word, nor
through letter as through us, as that the day of the Lord is at hand.
3 Let no one deceive you in any way, because, unless the apostasy
come first, and the man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition,
4 who opposes and exalts himself against every one that is called
God, or an object of worship, so that he sits in the temple of God,
openly showing himself that he is God.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
369
5 Remember you not that while I was yet with you, I told you these
things?
6 And now you know what withholds, that he may be revealed in his
own time.
7 For the mystery of iniquity already works, only till he that
withholds be taken out of the way;
8 and then shall be revealed the lawless one, whom the Lord Jesus
shall destroy with the breath of his mouth, and bring to naught by
the appearance of his coming;
9 even him whose coming is according to the working of Satan, in all
power and signs and wonders of falsehood,
10 and in all deceitfulness of unrighteousness for those that perish,
because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be
saved.
11 And for this reason God sends them the strength of delusion, that
they may believe the lie.
12 that all may be condemned that believed not the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness.
13 But we are bound to give thanks to God always for you, brethren
beloved by the Lord, that God from the beginning chose you to
salvation in sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth,
14 to which he called you through our gospel, to the obtaining of the
glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
15 So then, brethren, stand fast, and hold the traditions which you
were taught, whether through word or through our letter;
16 and may our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and our God and Father,
who loved us and gave eternal consolation and good hope in grace,
17 comfort your hearts, and establish you in every good work and
word.
2 Thessalonians 3
1 Finally pray, brethren, for us, that the word of the Lord may run
and be glorified as also among you,
2 and that we may be delivered from unreasonable and bad men, for
not all have faith.
3 But the Lord is faithful, who will establish you, and keep you from
the evil one.
4 But we have confidence in the Lord with respect to you, that you
both do and will do the things which we give in charge.
5 And may the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God and into
the patience of Christ.
6 But we charge you, brethren, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
that you withdraw yourselves from every brother that walks370
Codex Sinaiticus:
disorderly, and not according to the tradition which they received
from us.
7 For yourselves know how you ought to imitate us, because we were
not disorderly among you,
8 neither ate we bread from any one for naught, but in labor and toil
working night and day, that we might not burden any one of you:
9 not that we have not authority, but that we might give ourselves as
a pattern to you to imitate us.
10 For when we were with you, this we charged you, that if any one
will not work, neither let him eat.
11 For we hear of some walking among you disorderly, working not at
all, but being busybodies:
12 now such we charge and exhort in the Lord Jesus Christ, that
working with quietness they eat their own bread.
13 But you, brethren, be not weary in well doing.
14 And if any one obey not our word through the letter, mark that
man, and keep no company with him, that he may be put to shame;
15 and count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.
16 Now may the Lord of peace himself give you peace always in every
way. The Lord be with you all.
17 The salutation of Paul with my own hand, which is the token in
every letter: so I write.
18 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
371372
Codex Sinaiticus:
Paul to Timothy 1
1 Timothy 1
1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus according to the appointment of
God our Saviour and Christ Jesus our hope,
2 to Timothy, a true son in the faith. Grace, mercy, peace from God
the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
3 As I besought thee to abide in Ephesus, when I went into
Macedonia, that thou mightest charge some to teach no strange
things,
4 neither to give heed to fables and endless genealogies, which cause
questionings rather than a dispensation of God which is in faith:
5 now the end of the charge is love out of a pure heart, and out of a
good conscience, and out of faith unfeigned,
6 which some having missed have turned aside to vain talking,
7 desiring to be teachers of law, understanding neither what they say,
nor concerning what they strongly affirm.
8 But we know that the law is good, if any one would use it lawfully,
9 knowing this, that law is not made for a righteous man, but for the
lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and sinners, for the unholy
and profane, for murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, for
manslayers,
10 for lewd persons, for sodomites, men-stealers, liars, false
swearers, and if any other thing is opposed to healthful teaching,
11 according to the gospel of the glory of the blessed God, with which
I have been entrusted.
12 And I thank Christ Jesus our Lord who gave me strength, because
he counted me faithful, putting me into the ministry,
13 who before was a blasphemer, and persecutor, and overbearing;
but I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief,
14 and the grace of our Lord was very abundant with faith and love
which is in Christ Jesus.
15 Faithful is the word and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus
came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief:
16 however, for this reason I obtained mercy, that in me first Christ
Jesus might show forth the whole of his longsuffering, for a pattern
of those who should believe on him to life eternal.
17 Now to the King of the ages, incorruptible, invisible, the only God,
be honor and glory from age to age: Amen.
18 This charge I commit to thee, son Timothy, according to the
prophecies that went before on this. that in them thou mightest war
the good warfare,The H. T. Anderson New Testament
373
19 holding faith and a good conscience, which some having thrust
away concerning faith have made shipwreck:
20 of whom is Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I have delivered
over to Satan that they may be taught not to blaspheme.
1 Timothy 2
1 I exhort therefore, first of all, that supplications, prayers,
intercessions, thanksgivings, be made for all men,
2 for kings and all that are in an eminent station, that we may lead a
tranquil and undisturbed life in all godliness and gravity.
3 For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour,
4 who wills that all men be saved and come to the knowledge of the
truth.
5 For there is one God, and one mediator between God and man, the
man Christ Jesus,
6 who gave himself a ransom for all; the testimony in its proper
times;
7 for which I was appointed a preacher and an apostle, I speak the
truth, I lie not, a teacher of the Gentiles in faithfulness and truth.
8 I will therefore that the men pray in every place, lifting up holy
hands without wrath and disputations:
9 in like manner also, that women in decorous dress adorn
themselves with modesty and soberness of mind, not in braided hair
and gold, or pearls, or costly raiment,
10 but, which becomes women professing godliness, by means of
good works.
11 Let a woman in silence learn in all subjection;
12 but I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over a
man, but to be in silence.
13 For Adam was first formed, then Eve.
14 And Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in
transgression.
15 But she shall be saved through child-bearing, if they abide in faith
and love and holiness with sobriety.
1 Timothy 3
1 Faithful is the saying: If any one aspires to the office of bishop, he
desires a good work.
2 The bishop must then be blameless, the husband of one wife,
watchful, sober-minded, of good behavior, given to hospitality, apt to
teach,
3 not fond of wine, no striker; but gentle, not quarrelsome, not a
lover of money;374
Codex Sinaiticus:
4 one that rules his own house well — having his children in
subjection with all gravity; —
5 but if any one knows not how to rule his own house, how shall he
take care of the church of God? —
6 not a new convert, lest having become conceited he fall into the
condemnation of the devil.
7 Moreover he must also have a good report from those that are
without, lest he fall into reproach and the snare of the devil.
8 Deacons must likewise be grave, not double-tongued, not given to
much wine, not greedy after base gain,
9 holding the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience.
10 And let these also be first proved, then let them use the office of a
deacon, being blameless.
11 Their wives likewise must be grave, not slanderers, watchful,
faithful in all things.
12 Let the deacons be husbands of one wife, ruling their children and
their own houses well.
13 For they that have acted well as deacons purchase for themselves a
good degree, and great boldness in the faith that is in Christ Jesus.
14 These things write I to thee, hoping to come to thee shortly;
15 but if I delay, that thou mayest know how thou oughtest to behave
thyself in the house of God, which is the church of the living God, the
pillar and support of the truth.
16 And confessedly great is the mystery of godliness: He who was
manifested in flesh, was justified in spirit, seen by angels, preached
among the Gentiles, believed on in the world, taken up in glory.
1 Timothy 4
1 But the Spirit speaks expressly that in latter times some shall
apostatize from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and
teachings of demons,
2 through the hypocrisy of liars, seared as to their own conscience,
3 forbidding to marry, commanding to abstain from meats, which
God created to be partaken of with thanksgiving by those that believe
and acknowledge the truth.
4 For every creature of God is good, and nothing to be thrown away,
being received with thanksgiving;
5 for it is sanctified through the word of God and prayer.
6 If thou put the brethren in remembrance of these things, thou wilt
be a good minister of Christ Jesus, nourished in the words of the
faith and good teaching which thou hast followed;
7 but profane and old wives’ fables reject; and exercise thyself to
godliness.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
375
8 For bodily exercise is profitable for little; but godliness is profitable
for all things, having the promise of the life that now is and of that to
come.
9 Faithful is the word and worthy of all acceptance.
10 For this reason we both labor and suffer reproach, because we
trust in the living God, who is the Saviour of all men, especially of
believers.
11 Give these things in charge and teach.
12 Let no one despise thy youth, but become a pattern for the
believers, in word, in behavior, in love, in faith, in purity.
13 Till I come give attention to reading, to exhortation, to teaching.
14 Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee through
prophecy with the laying on of the hands of the eldership.
15 Meditate on these things, be engaged in them, that thy
advancement may be manifest to all.
16 Give heed to thyself and the teaching, continue in them; for in
doing this thou shalt save both thyself and them that hear thee.
1 Timothy 5
1 Rebuke not an aged man, but entreat him as a father, younger men
as brethren,
2 older women as mothers, younger women and sisters in all purity.
3 Honor widows that are widows indeed.
4 But if any widow has children or grandchildren, let them learn first
to show piety at home, and to requite their parents; for this is
acceptable in the sight of God.
5 But she that is a widow indeed and left alone trusts in God, and
continues in supplications and prayers night and day;
6 but she that lives in pleasure is dead while she lives.
7 And these things give in charge, that they may be blameless.
8 But if any one provides not for his own, and especially for those of
his own house, he has denied the faith, and is worse than an
unbeliever.
9 Let not a widow be taken into the number under sixty years of age,
the wife of one husband,
10 well reported of for good works, if she has brought up children, if
she has taken care of strangers, if she has washed the saints’ feet, if
she has relieved the afflicted, if she has diligently followed every good
work.
11 But younger widows reject; for when they shall become wanton
against Christ, they will marry,
12 having condemnation, because they have set aside their first faith;376
Codex Sinaiticus:
13 and at the same time also they being idle learn to wander about
from house to house, and not only idle, but tattlers also and
busybodies, speaking things that they ought not.
14 I will therefore that younger widows marry, bear children, manage
the house, give no occasion to the adversary to speak reproachfully;
15 for some have already turned aside after Satan.
16 If any believing man or woman has widows, let them relieve them,
and let not the church be burdened, that it may relieve those that are
widows indeed.
17 Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor,
especially they that labor in word and teaching.
18 For the Scripture says: Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that treads
out the grain, and: The laborer is worthy of his hire.
19 Against an elder receive not an accusation, unless before two or
three witnesses.
20 Those that sin rebuke before all, that the rest also may fear.
21 I solemnly charge thee in the sight of God, and Christ Jesus, and
the elect angels, that thou observe these things without prejudice,
doing nothing according to partiality.
22 Lay hands hastily on no one, neither be partaker of other men’s
sins. Keep thyself pure.
23 No longer drink water, but use a little wine for thy stomach’s sake
and thy frequent infirmities.
24 The sins of some men are manifest beforehand, going before to
judgment, but some they also follow after:
25 in like manner also works that are good are manifest beforehand,
and those that are otherwise can not be hid.
1 Timothy 6
1 Let as many as are under the yoke as servants, count their own
masters worthy of all honor, that the name of God and the teaching
be not blasphemed.
2 And they that have believing masters, let them not despise them,
because they are brethren, but rather serve them, because they are
faithful and beloved who are partakers of the benefit. These things
teach and exhort.
3 If any one teach otherwise, and assent not to healthful words, those
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the teaching which is according to
godliness,
4 he is conceited, knowing nothing, but doting about questions and
word-fightings, from which come envy, contention, blasphemies, evil
surmisings,
5 wranglings of men corrupt in mind, and destitute of the truth, who
suppose that godliness is a source of gain.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
377
6 But godliness with contentment is great gain.
7 For we brought nothing into the world: it is evident that we can
carry nothing out;
8 and having food and raiment, with these let us be content.
9 But they that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and
many foolish and hurtful desires, which sink men into destruction
and perdition.
10 For the love of money is the root of all evil, which some in longing
after have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with
many sorrows.
11 But thou, O man of God, flee these things; and follow
righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness.
12 Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life, for which
thou wast called and didst confess the good confession before many
witnesses.
13 I charge thee before God, who makes all things alive, and Christ
Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed the good confession,
14 that thou keep the commandment without spot, blameless, till the
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ,
15 which in his own times he will show, who is the blessed and only
Potentate, the King of kings and Lord of lords;
16 who only has immortality, dwelling in light unapproachable,
whom no one of men has seen, nor can see: to whom be honor and
strength eternal. Amen.
17 Charge them that are rich in the present age that they be not high-
minded, nor trust in the uncertainty of riches, but in God who gives
us all things richly for enjoyment;
18 that they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to
distribute, liberal,
19 treasuring up for themselves a good foundation, for the time to
come, that they may lay hold of the real life.
20 O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding
profane, vain babblings and oppositions of falsely named knowledge,
21 which some professing concerning the faith have erred.
22 Grace be with thee.378
Codex Sinaiticus:
Paul to Timothy 2
2 Timothy 1
1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through the will of God, according
to the promise of life that is in Christ Jesus,
2 to Timothy, my beloved son. Grace, mercy, peace from God the
Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
3 I thank God, whom I serve from my forefathers in a pure
conscience, that I have unceasing remembrance of thee in my prayers
night and day,
4 greatly desiring to see thee, being mindful of thy tears that I may be
filled with joy,
5 having taken in memory the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which
dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and in thy mother Eunice, and I
am persuaded that in thee also.
6 For which cause I put thee in remembrance to kindle up the gift of
God, which is in thee through the laying on of my hands.
7 For God has not given us the spirit of fear, but of power and of love
and of soberness of mind.
8 Be not therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, neither of
me his prisoner; but suffer evil with the in the gospel, according to
the power of God,
9 who saved us and called us with a holy calling, not according to our
works, but according to his own purpose and grace that was given us
in Christ Jesus before the times of the ages,
10 but is manifested now through the appearing of our Saviour Christ
Jesus, who indeed abolished death, and brought life and
incorruptibility to light through the gospel,
11 to which I was appointed a preacher, and an apostle, and a teacher
of the Gentiles;
12 for which cause I also suffer these things, but I am not ashamed;
for I know in whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is
able to keep that which I have committed to him to that day.
13 Hold fast the form of healthful words, which thou hast heard from
me, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus:
14 the excellent trust committed to thee, keep through the Holy Spirit
that dwells in us.
15 Thou knowest this, that all those in Asia, of whom are Phygelus
and Hermogenes, have turned away from me.
16 The Lord grant mercy to the house of Onesiphorus, because he
often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain.
17 but, when he was in Rome, he sought me out very diligently and
found me.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
379
18 The Lord grant to him to find mercy from the Lord in that day.
And in how many things he ministered to me in Ephesus, thou
knowest very well.
2 Timothy 2
1 Thou therefore, my son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ
Jesus,
2 and the things which thou hast heard from me through many
witnesses, these commit to faithful men, who shall be able to teach
others also.
3 Suffer affliction with me as a good soldier of Christ Jesus.
4 No one that wars entangles himself with the matters of life, that he
may please him that has chosen him to be a soldier.
5 And if any one also contend in the games, he is not crowned unless
he contend lawfully.
6 The laboring farmer must first partake of the fruits.
7 Consider what I say; for the Lord will give thee understanding in all
things.
8 Keep in memory Jesus Christ raised from the dead, of the posterity
of David, according to my gospel,
9 in which I suffer evil, even to bonds as an evil-doer, but the word of
God is not bound.
10 For this reason I endure all things for the sake of the elect, that
they also may obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with glory
eternal.
11 Faithful is the saying: For if we have died with him, we shall also
live with him;
12 if we are patient, we shall also reign with him; if we shall deny
him, he will also deny us;
13 if we believe not, he abides faithful; for he can not deny himself.
14 Put them in remembrance of these things, charging them before
the Lord not to fight about words, to no profit, for the subverting of
the hearers.
15 Study to present thyself to God approved, a workman not to be
made ashamed, cutting straight the word of truth.
16 But the profane vain-babblings avoid, for they will increase to a
greater degree of ungodliness,
17 and their word will eat as a gangrene. Of whom are Hymenseus
and Philetus,
18 who concerning the truth have erred, saying that the resurrection
is already past, and overthrow the faith of some.380
Codex Sinaiticus:
19 Nevertheless the firm foundation of God stands fast, having this
seal: The Lord knows them that are his, and: Let every one that
names the name of the Lord depart from iniquity.
20 But in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and of
silver, but also of wood and of earth, and some for honor, and some
for dishonor:
21 if then any one will cleanse himself from these, he shall be a vessel
for honor, sanctified, fit for the Master’s use, prepared for every good
work.
22 But flee youthful desires, and pursue righteousness, faith, love,
peace, with those that call on the Lord out of a pure heart.
23 But the foolish and unlearned questions reject, knowing that they
gender fightings;
24 and the servant of the Lord must not fight, but be gentle towards
all apt to teach, patient under evils,
25 in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if perhaps
God may give them repentance to the acknowledgment of the truth,
26 and they may awake to soberness out of the snare of the devil,
being taken captive by him at his will.
2 Timothy 3
1 But know this, that in the last days perilous times shall come.
2 For men shall be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, boasters,
haughty, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy,
3 without natural affection, truce-breakers, false accusers, without
self-control, fierce, that love not the good,
4 traitors, rash, conceited, lovers of pleasure more than lovers of
God,
5 having a form of godliness, but denying its power; from these also
turn away.
6 For of such are they that enter into houses, and lead captive silly
women burdened with sins, led away by various desires,
7 always learning and never able to come to the acknowledgment of
the truth.
8 But as Jannes and Jambres resisted Moses, so also these resist the
truth, men corrupt in mind, disapproved concerning the faith.
9 But they shall not proceed further; for their madness shall be
manifest to all, as theirs also became.
10 But thou hast followed my teaching, manner of life, purpose, faith,
longsuffering, love, patience,
11 persecutions, sufferings, such as came on me in Antioch, in
Iconium, in Lystra; which persecutions I endured, and out of them all
the Lord delivered me.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
381
12 And all indeed that desire to live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution.
13 But wicked men and seducers shall advance to the worse,
deceiving and being deceived.
14 But abide thou in the things which thou hast learned and been
assured of knowing from whom thou hast learned them,
15 and that from a child thou hast known the holy Scriptures, which
are able to make thee wise to salvation, through faith that is in Christ
Jesus.
16 All scripture is by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
teaching, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness,
17 that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished for
every good work.
2 Timothy 3
I charge thee before God, and Christ Jesus, who shall judge the living
and dead; I also charge thee by his appearing and his kingdom,
2 preach the word, be urgent in season, out of season, reprove,
rebuke, exhort, in all longsuffering and teaching.
3 For a time will come when they will not endure healthful teaching,
but according to their own desires they will heap up to themselves
teachers, having itching ears,
4 and will turn away their ears from the truth, and be turned to
fables.
5 But watch thou in all things, endure evil, do the work of an
evangelist, fully accomplish thy ministry.
6 For I am now ready to be poured out, and the time of my departure
is at hand.
7 I have fought the good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept
the faith:
8 henceforth there is laid up for me the crown of righteousness,
which the Lord, the righteous judge, will give to me in that day, and
not to me only, but also to all those that love his appearing.
9 Be diligent to come to me shortly.
10 For Demas has forsaken me, having loved the present age, and has
gone to Thessalonica, Crescens to Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia:
11 only Luke is with me. Take Mark, and bring him with thee; for he
is useful to me for service.
12 But Tychicus I have sent to Ephesus.
13 The cloak, which I left in Troas with Carpus, bring when thou
comest, and the books, especially the parchments.
14 Alexander the coppersmith laid many evil charges against me: the
Lord render to him according to his works.382
Codex Sinaiticus:
15 Do thou also be on thy guard against him; for he has greatly
withstood our words.
16 In my first defense no one was present with me, but all forsook
me; may it not be charged against them;
17 but the Lord stood by me, and gave me strength, that through me
what is preached might be fully known, and all the Gentiles might
hear; and I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion.
18 The Lord will deliver me from every evil work, and will keep me
safe to his heavenly kingdom: to whom be the glory from age to age.
Amen.
19 Salute Prisca and Aquila, and the house of Onesiphorus.
20 Erastus remained in Corinth, but Trophimus I left in Miletus sick.
21 Be diligent to come before winter. Eubulus salutes thee, Pudens
also, and Linus, and Claudia, and the brethren all.
22 The Lord be with thy spirit. Grace be with you.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
383384
Codex Sinaiticus:
Paul to Titus
Titus 1
1 Paul, a servant of God, but an apostle of Christ Jesus, according to
the faith of God’s elect, and the acknowledgment of truth that is
according to godliness,
2 in hope of eternal life, which God who lies not promised before the
times of the ages,
3 but in his own times manifested his word in what is preached, with
which I was intrusted according to the appointment of our Saviour
God,
4 to Titus, my true son according to the common faith. Grace and
peace from God the Father, and Christ Jesus our Saviour.
5 For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou mightest further set in
order the things that are wanting, and ordain elders in every city, as I
had appointed thee:
6 if any one is blameless, the husband of one wife, having faithful
children that are not accused of riotous living, nor unruly.
7 For the bishop must be blameless as the steward of God, not self-
willed, not soon angry, not fond of wine, no striker, not eager after
base gain,
8 but a lover of hospitality, a lover of the good, sober-minded, just,
holy, having self-control,
9 holding fast the faithful word according to the teaching, that he
may be able, in the teaching that gives health, both to exhort and
convince the gainsayers.
10 For there are many and unruly vain talkers and deceivers,
especially they of the circumcision,
11 whose mouths must be stopped: who subvert whole houses,
teaching things that they ought not, for the sake of base gain.
12 Some one of them, a prophet of their own, has said: The Cretans
are always liars, evil wild beasts, lazy bellies.
13 This testimony is true. For which cause reprove them with
severity, that they may be healthy in the faith,
14 not giving heed to Jewish fables, and commandments of men that
turn away from the truth.
15 To the pure all things are pure; but to the defiled and unbelieving
nothing is pure, but both their mind and conscience are defiled.
16 God they profess to know, but in their works they deny him, being
abominable and disobedient and, with regard to every good work,
disapproved.
Titus 2The H. T. Anderson New Testament
385
1 But speak thou the things that become the teaching that gives
health.
2 That aged men be watchful, grave, sober-minded, healthy in faith,
in love, in patience:
3 that aged women in like manner be, in behavior, reverent, not false
accusers, not addicted to much wine, teachers of what is good,
4 that they teach the young women to love their husbands, to love
their children,
5 to be sober-minded, chaste, workers at home, good, obedient to
their own husbands, that the word of God be not blasphemed.
6 The younger men in like manner exhort to be sober-minded,
7 in all things showing thyself an example of good works, in teaching
showing uncorruptness, gravity.
8 healthful speech that can not be condemned, that the opponent
may be ashamed, having nothing evil to say of us.
9 Servants exhort to be subject to their own masters, to be acceptable
to them in all things, not contradicting,
10 not taking a part for themselves, but showing all good faithfulness.
that they may adorn the teaching of our Saviour God in all things.
11 For the grace of God that brings salvation to all men has appeared,
12 instructing us, that, denying ungodliness and worldly desires, we
should live soberly and righteously and godly in the present age,
13 waiting for the blessed hope, and the appearing of the glory of our
great God and Saviour Jesus Christ,
14 who gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all iniquity,
and purify for himself a peculiar people, zealous for good works.
15 These things speak and exhort and reprove with all authority: let
no one despise thee.
Titus 3
1 Put them in mind to be subject to rulers, to authorities, to obey, to
be ready for every good work,
2 to revile no one, to be without contention, gentle, showing all
meekness to all men.
3 For we also were once foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving
various desires and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful and
hating one another;
4 but when the kindness and philanthropy of our Saviour God
appeared,
5 not by works of righteousness which we had done, but according to
his mercy, he saved us through the bath of regeneration and
renewing of the Holy Spirit,386
Codex Sinaiticus:
6 which he poured out upon us richly through Jesus Christ our
Saviour,
7 that having been justified by his grace, we might become heirs
according to the hope of life eternal.
8 Faithful is the saying, and concerning these things I will that thou
affirm strongly, in order that those that believe in God may be careful
to practice good works. These things are honorable and profitable for
men;
9 but foolish questions, and genealogies, and strifes, and contentions
about law, reject; for they are unprofitable and fruitless.
10 An heretical man, after the first and second admonition, reject,
11 knowing that such a man is perverted, and sins, being self-
condemned.
12 When I shall send Artemas to thee, or Tychicus, be diligent to
come to me to Nicopolis: for there have I determined to winter.
13 Zenas, the lawyer, and Apollos send forward diligently, that
nothing be wanting to them.
14 But let ours also learn to practice honorable works for necessary
uses, that they be not unfruitful.
15 All that are with me salute thee. Salute those that love us in the
faith.
16 Grace be with you all.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
387388
Codex Sinaiticus:
Paul to Philemon
Philemon
1 Paul, a prisoner of Christ Jesus, and Timothy the brother, to
Philemon the beloved, and our fellow-laborer,
2 and to Apphia the beloved, and Archippus our fellowsoldier, and to
the church that is in thy house.
3 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus
Christ.
4 I thank my God always, making mention of thee in my prayers,
5 hearing of thy love and faith which thou hast toward the Lord Jesus
and for all the saints,
6 that the fellowship of thy faith may become active in the
acknowledgment of every good thing that is in us for Christ Jesus.
7 For we, have great gratification and comfort in thy love, because
the bowels of the saints have been refreshed by thee, brother.
8 Wherefore having great boldness in Christ to command thee what
is becoming,
9 because of love I rather beseech, being such a one as Paul an aged
man, but now also a prisoner of Christ Jesus,
10 I beseech thee in behalf of my son, whom I have begotten in my
bonds, Onesimus,
11 who for some time was unprofitable to thee, but now useful to
thee and to me, whom I have sent back.
12 But do thou receive him, that is my own bowels,
13 whom I would have retained with myself, that in thy stead he
might minister to me in the bonds of the gospel;
14 but without thy consent I wished to do nothing, that thy good deed
might not be as of necessity, but according to free will;
15 for perhaps for this purpose he was separated from thee for an
hour, that thou mightest receive him for ever,
16 no longer as a servant, but above a servant, a brother beloved,
especially by me, but how much more by thee, both in the flesh and
in the Lord.
17 If, then, thou regardest me a partner, receive him as myself.
18 But if in anything he has wronged thee, or owes thee, charge this
to me.
19 I Paul have written it with my own hand: I will repay: that I may
not say to thee that thou owest even thyself to me.
20 Yes, brother, let me have joy of thee in the Lord: refresh my
bowels in Christ.
21 Having confidence in thy obedience, I have written to thee,
knowing that thou wilt do even more than I say.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
389
22 And at the same time also prepare for me a lodging; for I hope
that through your prayers I shall be given to you, as a favor.
23 Epaphras, my fellow-prisoner in Christ Jesus, salutes thee,
24 also Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, Luke, my fellow-laborers.
25 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.390
Codex Sinaiticus:
Epistle to the Hebrews
Hebrews 1
1 God, after having in many parts and many ways spoken in ancient
times to the fathers, in the prophets, has in the end of these days
spoken to us in his Son,
2 whom he has appointed heir of all things, through whom also he
made the ages,
3 who, being the effulgence of his glory and the exact image of his
substance, bearing onward also all things by the word of his power,
when he had through himself made a cleansing of sins sat down at
the right hand of the majesty on high,
4 having become so much superior to angels as the name which he
has inherited is more excellent than they.
5 For to which of the angels said he at any time: Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee? and again: I will be to him a Father,
and he shall be to me a Son?
6 And when he shall have brought again the first begotten into the
world, he says: And let all the angels of God worship him.
7 And in respect indeed to angels, he says: Who makes his angels
winds, and his ministers a flame of fire.
8 But with respect to the Son: Thy throne, O God, is forever and ever;
and: A scepter of rectitude is the scepter of thy kingdom.
9 Thou didst love righteousness and hate iniquity: therefore, O God,
thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.
10 And: Thou, Lord, in the beginning didst lay the foundation of the
earth, and the heavens are the works of thy hands:
11 they shall perish, but thou remainest: and they all shall grow old as
a garment,
12 and as a mantle shalt thou roll them up, and they shall be
changed, but thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail.
13 But to which of the angels has he said at any time: Sit at my right
hand, till I make thy enemies thy footstool?
14 Are they not all ministering spirits sent forth to minister for the
sake of those that shall inherit salvation?
Hebrews 2
1 For this reason it is necessary that we give the more earnest heed to
the things that have been heard, lest perhaps we glide away from
them.
2 For if the word that was spoken through angels became steadfast,
and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense
of reward,The H. T. Anderson New Testament
391
3 how shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation? which began
to be spoken through the Lord, and was confirmed for us by those
that heard,
4 God jointly testifying with them, both by signs and wonders, and
various mighty deeds, and distributions of the Holy Spirit, according
to his will.
5 For not to angels did he put in subjection the world to come, of
which we speak.
6 But one in some place testified, saying: What is man that thou art
mindful of him? or the son of man, that thou lookest on him?
7 Thou madest him a little lower than angels, with glory and honor
thou didst crown him,
8 thou didst put all things in subjection under his feet. For in having
subjected all things to him, he left nothing not subjected to him; but
now we see not yet all things subjected to him.
9 But him that was made a little lower than angels we do see, Jesus,
because of the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor; that
he by the grace of God might taste of death for every man.
10 For it became him, for whom are all things and through whom are
all things, in bringing many sons to glory, to make the author of their
salvation perfect through sufferings.
11 For both he that sanctifies and they that are sanctified are all of
one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren,
12 saying: I will declare thy name to my brethren, in the midst of the
congregation will I sing hymns to thee.
13 And again: I will put my trust in him. And again: Behold, I and the
children that God gave to me.
14 Since then the children partake of flesh and blood, himself also in
like manner took part in the same, that through death he might
render powerless him that has the power of death, that is, the devil;
15 and deliver them who through fear of death were all their lifetime
subject to bondage.
16 For surely not angels does he succor,* but the posterity of
Abraham he succors.
*To succor—to take hold of in order to save.
17 Whence, it behooved him in all things to be made like his
brethren, that he might become a merciful and faithful high priest in
things pertaining to God, that he might make expiation for the sins of
the people.
18 For in that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able also
to assist those that are tempted.
Hebrews 3392
Codex Sinaiticus:
1 Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of a heavenly calling, consider
the apostle and high priest of our confession, Jesus,
2 who was faithful to him that appointed him, as Moses also in all his
house.
3 For this man has been counted worthy of more honor than Moses,
by as much as he that constructed the house has more honor than the
house.
4 For every house is constructed by some one, but he that
constructed all things is God.
5 And Moses indeed was faithful in all his house as a servant, for a
testimony to those things that should afterward be spoken;
6 but Christ is a Son over his own house, whose house we are, if we
hold fast the boldness and the glorying of the hope.
7 Wherefore, as says the Holy Spirit: Today, if you hear his voice,
8 harden not your hearts as in the provocation in the day of
temptation in the wilderness,
9 where your fathers tempted me by proving and saw my works forty
years.
10 Wherefore I was angry with that generation, and said: They do
always err in their heart; and they have not known my ways,
11 so I swore in my wrath: They shall not enter into my rest.
12 Take heed, brethren, lest perhaps there shall be in any one of you
an evil heart of unbelief in apostatizing from the living God,
13 but exhort one another each day, while it is called Today, lest any
one of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin;
14 for we have become partakers of Christ, if indeed we hold fast the
beginning of the confidence firm to the end.
15 In its being said: To-day, if you hear his voice, harden not your
hearts as in the provocation;
16 for who, when they heard, did provoke? yes, did not all that came
out of Egypt through Moses?
17 And with whom was he angry forty years? was it not with those
that sinned, whose carcasses fell in the wilderness?,
18 And to whom did he swear that they should not enter into his rest,
but to those that believed not?
19 And we see that they could not enter in because of unbelief.
Hebrews 4
1 Let us fear, therefore, lest perhaps, as there remains a promise of
entering into his rest, any of you should seem to have come short of
it.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
393
2 For we also have had the good news preached to us, even as they;
but the word that was heard did not profit them, not being mixed
with faith in them that heard.
3 For we who have believed are entering into the rest, as he has said:
So I swore in my wrath: They shall not enter into my rest, although
his works had been finished from the foundation of the world.
4 For he has spoken in some place of the seventh day thus: And God
rested on the seventh day from all his works.
5 And in this again: They shall not enter into my rest.
6 Since then it remains that some enter into it, and those, that
formerly had the good news preached to them, entered not in
because of unbelief,
7 again he determines a day, Today, saying in David after so long a
time, as has been said before, To-day if you hear his voice, harden
not your hearts.
8 For if Joshua had given them rest, he would not after this have
spoken of another day.
9 There remains, therefore, a sabbath rest for the people of God.
10 For he that has entered into his rest has also himself rested from
his works, as God from his own.
11 Let us therefore be diligent to enter into that rest, lest any one fall
after the same example of unbelief.
12 For the word of God is living and energetic, and sharper than any
two-edged sword, and piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul
and spirit, of the joints also and the marrow, and is a judge of the
thoughts and purposes of the heart;
13 and there is no creature not manifest in his sight, but all things are
naked and exposed to the eyes of him, to whom we must give an
account.
14 Having therefore a great high priest that has passed through the
heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast the confession.
15 For we have not a high priest that can not sympathize with our
infirmities, but has been tempted in all things like ourselves, without
sin.
16 Let us therefore come with boldness to the throne of grace, that we
may receive mercy, and find grace for seasonable help.
Hebrews 5
1 For every high priest taken from among men is appointed for men
in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices
for sins,
2 being able to have compassion on the ignorant and erring, since
himself also is compassed with weakness,394
Codex Sinaiticus:
3 and because of it he is obliged, as for the people, so also for himself,
to offer for sins.
4 And not to himself does any one take the honor, but being called by
God, just as also Aaron.
5 So, also, Christ glorified not himself in having become a high priest,
but he that said to him: Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee:
6 as also in another place he says: Thou art a priest for ever,
according to the order of Melchisedec:
7 who, in the days of his flesh, having with strong crying and tears
offered up both prayers and supplications to him who was able to
save him from death, and having been heard because of his piety,
8 although he was a Son, learned obedience from the things that he
suffered;
9 and having been made perfect, he became, to all those that obey
him, the author of eternal salvation,
10 having been addressed by God as high priest according to the
order of Melchisedec.
11 Concerning whom we have many things to say, and hard to be
explained, since you have become dull of hearing.
12 For while you ought, on account of the time, to be teachers, you
again have need that some one teach you what are first principles of
the oracles of God, and have need of milk, not of solid food.
13 For every one that partakes of milk is unskilled in the word of
righteousness, for he is a babe;
14 but solid food belongs to full-grown men, who because of habit
have their senses exercised to the discerning of both good and evil.
Hebrews 6
1 Wherefore passing by the rudimental instruction concerning Christ,
let us go onward to the perfection, not again laying a foundation of
repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God,
2 of the teaching in respect to baptisms, also of the laying on of
hands, also of the resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment.
3 And this will we do, if indeed God permit.
4 For it is impossible to renew again to repentance those that were
once enlightened, and had tasted of the heavenly gift, and had
become partakers of the Holy Spirit,
5 and had tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the coming
age,
6 and have fallen away, crucifying to themselves the Son of God
anew, and putting him to an open shame.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
395
7 For land that drinks up the rain that often comes upon it, and
yields herbs fit for those for whose sake it is also cultivated, shares
blessing from God;
8 but bringing forth thorns and thistles it is disapproved and near a
curse, the end of which is for burning.
9 But concerning you, beloved, we are persuaded better things, and
things that accompany salvation, though we thus speak.
10 For God is not unrighteous to forget your work, and the love
which you showed for his name, in having ministered to the saints,
and in ministering.
11 But we desire that each one of you show the same diligence in
respect to the full assurance of the hope to the end,
12 in order that you become not slothful, but imitators of those who
through faith and longsuffering inherit the promises.
13 For when God made promise to Abraham, since he could swear by
no greater, he swore by himself,
14 saying: Surely blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying I will
multiply thee;
15 and so having patiently endured he obtained the promise.
16 For men indeed swear by the greater, and to them an oath for
confirmation is an end of all strife:
17 in which God being more abundantly willing to show to the heirs
of the promise the immutability of his purpose, interposed with an
oath,
18 that by two immutable things, in which it is impossible for God to
lie, we may have strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay
hold on the hope set before us,
19 which we have as an anchor of the soul both safe and steadfast and
which enters into the part within the veil,
20 whither a forerunner for us has entered, Jesus, having become a
high priest forever according to the order of Melchisedec.
Hebrews 7
1 For this Melchisedec, king of Salem, priest of the most high God,
who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings and
blessed him,
2 to whom Abraham also divided a tenth of all, first indeed being by
interpretation king of righteousness, and then also king of Salem,
which is king of peace,
3 without father, without mother, without genealogy, having neither
beginning of days nor end of life, but being made like unto the Son of
God, abides a priest continually.
4 And consider how great this man was, to whom Abraham the
patriarch gave even a tenth of the best of the spoils.396
Codex Sinaiticus:
5 And they indeed of the sons of Levi who receive the priesthood
have a commandment to take tithes of the people according to the
law, that is, of their brethren, though they come out of the loins of
Abraham;
6 but he that counts not his genealogy from these took tithes of
Abraham, and has blessed him that had the promises.
7 And without all contradiction the less is blessed by the greater.
8 And here indeed men that die receive tithes, but there he that has
the testimony that he lives.
9 And, so to speak, even Levi, who receives tithes, has been tithed
through Abraham;
10 for he was yet in the loins of his father when Melchisedec met him.
11 If indeed, then, perfection was through the Levitical priesthood,
for upon it the people received the law, what further need that a
different priest should arise according to the order of Melchisedec,
and not be called according to the order of Aaron?
12 For the priesthood being changed, there becomes of necessity a
change also of the law.
13 For he of whom these things are spoken, belongs to another tribe,
from which no one has given attendance at the altar;
14 for it is evident that our Lord has sprung from Judah, of which
tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning priests.
15 And it is yet more abundantly evident, if according to the likeness
of Melchisedec there arises a different priest,
16 who was made such not according to the law of a carnal
commandment, but according to the power of an indissoluble life.
17 For it is testified: Thou art a priest for ever according to the order
of Melchisedec.
18 For there takes place indeed a setting aside of the preceding
commandment on account of the weakness and unprofitableness of
it,
19 for the law perfected nothing, and the introduction of a better
hope, through which we draw near to God.
20 And inasmuch as not without the swearing of an oath, for they
indeed have become priests without the swearing of an oath,
21 but he with the swearing of an oath by him that said to him: The
Lord swore, and will not regret it, Thou art a priest for ever:
22 insomuch has Jesus become the surety of a better covenant.
23 And they indeed, many of them, have become priests, because by
means of death they were forbidden to continue;
24 but he, because he continues forever, has a priesthood that does
not pass to another;
25 whence, he is able also to save completely those that come to God
through him, since he lives always to make intercession for them.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
397
26 For such a high priest also became us, holy, harmless, undefiled,
separated from sinners, and having become higher than the heavens,
27 who has no daily necessity, as the chief priests, to offer up
sacrifices first for his own sins, then for those of the people; for this
he did once for all, when he offered up himself.
28 For the law appoints men chief priests, that have infirmity, but
the word of the oath, which was since the law, appoints the Son, who
has been perfected forever.
Hebrews 8
1 Now in respect to the things spoken, the main point is: we have
such a high priest who took his seat at the right hand of the throne of
the Majesty in the heavens,
2 a minister of the sanctuary and of the true tabernacle, which the
Lord pitched, not man.
3 For every high priest is appointed to offer both gifts and sacrifices;
whence, it is necessary that this one also have something that he can
offer.
4 For if indeed he were on earth, he would not even be a priest, as
there are those that offer gifts according to the law,
5 who serve a copy and shadow of the heavenly things, as Moses was
admonished when about to complete the tabernacle: For see, says he,
that thou make all things according to the pattern that was shown to
thee in the mount;
6 but now has he obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much
also he is the mediator of a better covenant, which has been
established upon better promises.
7 For if that first covenant had been faultless, no place would have
been sought for a second.
8 For finding fault with them he says: Behold, days are coming, says
the Lord, and I will make with the house of Israel and the house of
Judah a new covenant,
9 not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the
day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of
Egypt, because they continued not in my covenant, and I regarded
them not, says the Lord.
10 Because this is the covenant that I will make with the house of
Israel after those days, says the Lord, Putting my laws into their
understanding, I will also write them on their hearts, and I will be to
them a God, and they shall be to me a people.
11 And they shall not teach each one his fellow-citizen, and each one
his brother, saying: Know the Lord; for all shall know me from the
least of them to the, greatest of them.398
Codex Sinaiticus:
12 For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and
their iniquities will I remember no more.
13 In that he says: A new, he has made, the first antiquated ; and that
which is antiquated and growing old is ready to disappear.
Hebrews 9
1 Indeed, then, even the first covenant had ordinances of service, and
the sanctuary belonging to this world.
2 For a tabernacle was constructed, the first, in which was the
candlestick, and the table, and bread of the presence, which is called
sanctuary.
3 But beyond the second veil, the tabernacle that is called the holy of
holies,
4 which had the golden altar of incense, and the ark of the covenant
overlaid round about with gold, in which was the golden pot that held
the manna, and the rod of Aaron that budded, and the tables of the
covenant;
5 but above it cherubim of glory shadowing the mercy-seat:
concerning which things we can not now speak particularly.
6 And these things having been thus put in order, into the first
tabernacle indeed the priests always go accomplishing the services,
7 but into the second the high priest alone once during the year, not
without blood, which he offers for himself and the errors of the
people,
8 the Holy Spirit signifying this, that the way into the sanctuary has
not yet been made manifest while the first tabernacle is yet standing,
9 which is a figure for the time present, according to which are
offered both gifts and sacrifices that are not able to perfect as
pertains to the conscience him that serves,
10 only in connection with meats and drinks and different
immersions, ordinances of the flesh imposed till the time of
reformation.
11 But Christ having come, a high priest of the coming good things,
through the greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with
hands, that is, not of this creation,
12 neither through the blood of goats and calves, but through his own
blood entered once for all into the holy places, having obtained
eternal redemption.
13 For if the blood of goats and bulls, and the ashes of a heifer
sprinkling the defiled sanctifies in respect to the purification of the
flesh,
14 how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal
Spirit offered himself without spot to God, cleanse your conscience
from dead works to serve the living God.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
399
15 And for this reason he is the mediator of the new covenant, that
death, having taken place for the redemption of transgressions that
were under the first covenant, they that have been called may receive
the promises of the eternal inheritance.
16 For where a testament is, it is necessary that the death of the
testator be brought in;
17 for a testament is valid after men are dead, since has it any force at
all while the, testator lives?
18 Whence, not even the first covenant was inaugurated without
blood.
19 For when Moses had spoken every commandment to all the
people according to the law, he took the blood of calves and of goats
with water and scarlet wool and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book
itself and all the people,
20 saying: This is the blood of the covenant which God enjoined
upon you.
21 And he sprinkled in like manner with blood the tabernacle also
and all the vessels of the service.
22 And almost all things are cleansed with blood according to the
law, and without the shedding of blood there takes place no
remission.
23 It was necessary, then, that the copies of things in the heavens
should be cleansed with these, but the heavenly things themselves
with better sacrifices than these.
24 For Christ did not enter the holy places made with hands, the
likenesses of the true, but into heaven itself, now to appear in the
presence of God for us,
25 neither that he might offer himself often, as the high priest enters
year by year into the holy places with blood of others;
26 for then he must have suffered often since the foundation of the
world, but now once in the conclusion of the ages has he been made
manifest, to put away sin through the sacrifice of himself.
27 And inasmuch as it is appointed to men once to die and after this
the judgment,
28 so also Christ, having been once offered to bear the sins of many,
shall to those that look for him appear a second time without sin in
order to salvation.
Hebrews 10
1 For the law, having a shadow of the coming good things, not the
image itself of the things, can never with the same sacrifices, which
they offer year by year continually, make those that come to them
perfect;400
Codex Sinaiticus:
2 for then would they not have ceased to be offered, because the
worshippers, having been once cleansed, would have no longer a
consciousness of sins.
3 But in them there is a remembrance of sins every year;
4 for it is impossible that the blood of bulls and goats should take
away sins.
5 Wherefore on coming into the world he says: Sacrifice and offering
thou didst not desire, but a body thou didst prepare for me;
6 in whole burnt offerings and offerings for sin thou didst not
delight:
7 then said I: Behold, I come, in the volume of the book it is written
of me, to do, O God, thy will.
8 Saying above: Sacrifices and offerings, and whole burnt offerings,
and offerings for sin thou didst not desire, neither hadst pleasure in
them, which are offered according to the law,
9 then he said: Lo, I come to do thy will. He takes away the first that
he may establish the second,
10 in which will, we are sanctified, who have been sanctified through
the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.
11 And every priest indeed stands daily ministering and offering
oftentimes the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins;
12 but he, after having offered one sacrifice for sins, forever sat down
at the right hand of God,
13 henceforth awaiting till his enemies be made his footstool.
14 For by one, offering he has perfected forever the sanctified.
15 And the Holy Spirit also is a witness for us; for after having said
before:
16 This is the covenant that I will make with them after those days,
says the Lord: Putting my laws into their hearts, in their minds also
will I write them,
17 and their sins and their iniquities I will remember no more.
18 Now where remission of these is, there is no more an offering for
sin.
19 Having, then, brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the
blood of Jesus,
20 by a new and living way which he has initiated for us through the
veil, that is, his flesh;
21 and having a great priest over the house of God;
22 let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having
had our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience,
23 and our body washed in pure water; let us hold fast the confession
of the hope without wavering, for he is faithful that has promised;
24 and let us consider one another to incite to love and good works,The H. T. Anderson New Testament
401
25 not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as is the
custom of some, but exhorting, and so much the more as you see the
day approaching.
26 For if we sin willfully after we have received the knowledge of the
truth, there remains no more a sacrifice for sins,
27 but some fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation
that shall devour the adversaries.
28 Any one that has set aside the law of Moses dies without mercy
under two or three witnesses:
29 of how much severer punishment think you he shall be thought
worthy, who has trod under foot the Son of God, and has counted the
blood of the covenant, with which he was sanctified, a common thing,
and has outraged the Spirit of grace?
30 For we know him that said: Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says
the Lord: and again: The Lord will judge his people.
31 It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
32 But call to mind the former days, in which after you were
enlightened you endured a great conflict of sufferings,
33 partly being made a spectacle both by reproaches and afflictions,
partly having become companions of those that were thus treated.
34 For you sympathized with these in bonds, and accepted with joy
the seizing of your goods, knowing that you have for yourselves a
better possession and one that endures.
35 Cast not away, then, your confidence, which has great recompense
of reward.
36 For you have need of patience, that after having done the will of
God you may receive the promise.
37 For yet a little, very little while, He that comes will come and will
not delay:
38 But my righteous man shall live by faith, and if he draw back, my
soul shall have no pleasure in him.
39 But we are not of fearfulness for perdition, but of faith for the
preservation of the soul.
Hebrews 11
1 And faith is confidence as to things hoped for, conviction as to
things not seen.
2 For in this the elders obtained a good report.
3 By faith we understand that the ages were set in order by the word
of God, so that not from things that appear has that which is seen
come into being.
4 By faith Abel offered to God more sacrifice than Cain, through
which he obtained testimony that he was righteous, God testifying in
regard to his gifts, and through it he though dead yet speaks.402
Codex Sinaiticus:
5 By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death, and
was not found because
God translated him. For before the translation he had the testimony
that he pleased God;
6 and without faith it is impossible to please him; for he that comes
to God must believe that he is, and that he becomes a rewarder of
those that diligently seek him.
7 By faith Noah, having been warned of things not yet seen, moved
with reverence, prepared an ark for the salvation of his house,
through which faith he condemned the world, and became an heir of
the righteousness according to faith.
8 By faith Abraham, being called, became obedient in going forth
into a place which he should after receive for an inheritance, and he
went forth not knowing whither he was going.
9 By faith he sojourned in the land of promise as a foreign land,
having dwelt in tents, with Isaac and Jacob, heirs with him of the
same promise;
10 for he looked for the city that has the foundations, of which the
architect and builder is God.
11 By faith also Sarah herself received strength for the conception of
seed even beyond the time of life, because she counted him faithful
that had promised.
12 Wherefore there sprung even from one, and that, too, having
become dead, as the stars of heaven in number, and as the sand that
is along the seashore, innumerable.
13 According to faith died all these, not having received the promises,
but having seen them at a distance and saluted them, and confessed
that they were strangers and sojourners in the land.
14 For they that say such things show plainly that they seek a
country.
15 And if indeed they had had in mind that from which they came,
they would have had opportunity to return;
16 but now they desire a better; that is, a heavenly. Wherefore God is
not ashamed to be called their God; for he has prepared for them a
city.
17 By faith Abraham when tried offered up Isaac, even the firstborn
did he offer up who had received the promises,
18 of whom it was said: In Isaac shall thy posterity be called;
19 accounting that God was able to raise even from the dead: whence,
also, he received him back in a figure.
20 By faith also Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to
come.
21 By faith Jacob, when dying, blessed each of the sons of Joseph,
and worshipped on the top of his staff.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
403
22 By faith Joseph, when dying, made mention of the departure of
the sons of Israel, and gave commandment concerning his bones.
23 By faith Moses, after he had been born, was concealed three
months by his parents, because they saw that the child was beautiful,
and they were not afraid of the commandment of the king.
24 By faith Moses, when he became of age, refused to be called the
son of Pharaoh’s daughter,
25 rather choosing to suffer evil with the people of God than to have
a temporary enjoyment of sin,
26 esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures
of Egypt; for he looked away to the recompense of reward.
27 By faith he left Egypt, not being afraid of the wrath of the king; for
he endured as seeing him that is invisible.
28 By faith he kept the Passover and the sprinkling of blood, that he
that destroyed the firstborn might not touch them.
29 By faith they passed through the Red Sea as over dry ground,
which the Egyptians attempting to do were drowned.
30 By faith the walls of Jericho fell down, after they had been
surrounded for seven days.
31 By faith Rahab the harlot perished not with those that believed
not, because she received the spies with peace.
32 And what do I say more? For the time would fail me, should I tell
of Gideon, Barak also and Samson and Jephtha, of David also and of
Samuel and the prophets,
33 who through faith subdued kingdoms, worked righteousness,
obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions,
34 quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, from
weakness were made strong, became mighty in war, turned to flight
armies of foreigners;
35 women received their dead after a resurrection; and others were
beaten to death, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a
better resurrection;
36 but others had trial of mockings and scourgings, and further of
bonds and imprisonment:
37 they were stoned, they were sawn asunder, they were tempted,
they were slain with the sword, they wandered about in sheepskins,
in goatskins, being destitute, afflicted, maltreated,
38 of whom the world was not worthy, wandering in deserts, and
mountains, and caves, and dens of the earth.
39 And these all having obtained a good report through faith received
not the promise,
40 God having provided some better thing concerning us, that
without us they should not be made perfect.404
Codex Sinaiticus:
Hebrews 12
1 Therefore, having so great a cloud of witnesses lying round about
us, let us also lay aside every weight and the sin that easily besets,
and run with perseverance the race that lies before us,
2 looking away to Jesus, the author and perfecter of the faith, who for
the joy lying before him endured the cross, having despised the
shame, and has sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.
3 For consider him who endured such contradiction by sinners
against himself, that you may not be weary, fainting in your souls.
4 Not yet to blood have you resisted, striving against sin;
5 and you have forgotten the exhortation, which speaks to you as to
sons: My son, despise not the chastisements of the Lord, neither be
weary when corrected by him;
6 for whom the Lord loves he chastens, and scourges every son that
he receives.
7 For chastisement you endure; God deals with you as with sons. For
who is a son whom the father chastens not?
8 But if you are without chastisement, of which all have become
partakers, then are you bastards and not sons.
9 So, then, fathers of our flesh indeed have we had as chastisers, and
we gave them reverence; shall we not much rather be in subjection to
the Father of spirits and live?
10 For they indeed for a few days chastened us according to their
pleasure, but he for our profit, that we may partake of his holiness.
11 But all chastisement for the present indeed seems not a matter of
joy, but of grief; afterward, however, it yields the peaceful fruit of
righteousness to those that are exercised by it.
12 Wherefore set right again the hands that hang down and the
enfeebled knees,
13 and make straight paths for your feet, that what is lame may not
be turned out of the way, but may rather be healed.
14 Pursue peace with all, and holiness, without which no one shall
see the Lord,
15 taking care lest anyone come short of the grace of God, lest any
root of bitterness spring up and cause trouble, and by it the many be
defiled,
16 lest there be any lewd person, or profane, as Esau, who for one
meal sold his birthright.
17 For you know that also afterward, wishing to inherit the blessing,
he was rejected; for he found no place of repentance, though he
sought it carefully with tears.
18 For you have not come to a mountain that is touched, and to
burning fire, and blackness, and thick darkness, and tempest,The H. T. Anderson New Testament
405
19 and the sound of a trumpet, and the voice of words, which they
that heard entreated that a word should not be further spoken to
them;
20 for they did not endure that which was commanded: If even a
beast touch the mountain, it shall be stoned;
21 and so fearful was the sight, Moses said: I exceedingly fear and
quake;
22 but you have come to mount Zion, and to the city of the living
God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to myriads,
23 the festal assembly of angels, and to the church of firstborn ones
enrolled in the heavens, and to the judge, God of all, and to the
spirits of just men made perfect,
24 and to the mediator of the new covenant, Jesus, and to the blood
of sprinkling that speaks more mightily than Abel.
25 See that you refuse not him that speaks; for if they escaped not
who refused him when giving oracles on earth, much more shall not
we, if we turn away from him giving oracles from the heavens,
26 whose voice then shook the earth, but now he has promised,
saying: Yet once more I will shake not the earth only, but also the
heaven.
27 And the “Yet once” signifies the removal of the things shaken as of
things that have been made, that the things not shaken may remain.
28 Wherefore, receiving a kingdom that cannot be shaken, let us
have gratitude, by which we may serve God acceptably, with
reverence and fear;
29 for our God is a consuming fire.
Hebrews 13
1 Let brotherly love continue.
2 Be not forgetful of hospitality; for by means of it some have
unconsciously entertained angels.
3 Remember those in bonds, as having been bound; those that suffer
evil, as being yourselves also in the body.
4 Let marriage be honored in all respects, and the bed be undefiled;
but lewd persons and adulterers God will judge.
5 Let there be no money-loving disposition, being content with the
things that you have; for he himself has said: I will never leave thee,
nor will I in any way forsake thee;
6 so that we may boldly say: The Lord is my helper, and I will not
fear: what shall a man do to me?
7 Remember your leaders, who spoke to you the word of God, the
issue of whose life attentively considering, imitate their faith.
8 Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever,406
Codex Sinaiticus:
9 Be not carried away by various and strange teachings; for it is good
that the heart be established with grace, not with meats, which have
not profited those that have walked in them.
10 We have an altar, from which they have no right to eat that serve
the tabernacle.
11 For the bodies of those animals, whose blood is carried by the chief
priest into the sanctuary, are burned without the camp.
12 Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people through
his own blood, suffered without the gate.
13 Therefore let us go forth to him without the camp bearing his
reproach;
14 for here we have no continuing city, but we seek one that is to
come.
15 Through him therefore let us offer to God the sacrifice of praise
continually, that is the fruit of lips that give thanks to his name.
16 But to do good and to distribute forget not; for with such sacrifices
God is well pleased.
17 Obey your leaders and be submissive: for they watch for your
souls, as they that shall give an account; that they may do this with
joy, and not in grief; for this would be unprofitable for you.
18 Pray for us; for we are persuaded that we have a good conscience,
in all things willing to live honorably.
19 And the more abundantly do I beseech you to do this, that I may
be restored to you the sooner.
20 Now may the God of peace, who brought again from the dead the
shepherd of the sheep who is great through the blood of the eternal
covenant, our Lord Jesus,
21 make you perfect in every good work that you may do his will,
working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus
Christ; to whom be glory, through the ages: amen.
22 And I beseech you, brethren, bear with the word of exhortation;
for I have written to you in few words.
23 Know that our brother Timothy is set at liberty, with whom if he
comes soon I will see you.
24 Salute all your leaders and all the saints. They of Italy salute you.
25 Grace be with you all: amen.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
407408
Codex Sinaiticus:
Epistle of James
James 1
1 James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve
tribes that are in the dispersion, greeting.
2 Count it all joy, my brethren, when you fall into diversified
temptations,
3 knowing that the proof of your faith works out patience.
4 But let patience have a perfect work, that you may be perfect and
entire, wanting in nothing.
5 But if any one of you is wanting in wisdom, let him ask from God,
who gives to all liberally and upbraids not, and it shall be given to
him.
6 But let him ask in faith, doubting nothing; for he that doubts is like
a wave of the sea, driven by the wind and tossed.
7 Let that man surely not think that he shall receive anything from
the Lord —
8 a man of two minds, unsteady in all his ways.
9 But let the brother that is of low degree glory in his exaltation,
10 and the rich in his humiliation, because as the flower of grass shall
he pass away.
11 For the sun rises with the burning wind and withers the grass, and
its flower falls away, and the beauty of its appearance perishes: so
also shall the rich man fade away in his goings.
12 Blessed is the man that endures temptation, because having
become approved he shall receive the crown of life, which he has
promised to those that love him.
13 Let no one, when tempted, say: I am tempted by God. For God
cannot be tempted by evils, and himself tempts no one.
14 But every one is tempted by his own desire, being drawn away and
seduced:
15 then desire, having conceived, brings forth sin, and sin, having
been perfected, brings forth death.
16 Be not deceived, my beloved brethren.
17 Every good giving and every perfect gift is from above, coming
down from the Father of lights, with whom there is no change nor
shadow cast by turning.
18 Having willed it, he begot us with the word of truth, in order that
we should be a firstfruit of his creatures.
19 You know, my beloved brethren; but let every man be swift to
hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath;
20 for the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
409
21 Wherefore, having put away all filthiness and overflowing of
malice, receive in meekness the implanted word that is able to save
your souls.
22 But become doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving
yourselves.
23 For if any one is a hearer of the word and not a doer, he is like a
man beholding his natural face in a mirror;
24 for he beholds himself, and goes away, and immediately forgets
what kind of man he was.
25 But he that looks into the perfect law of liberty and continues, he
not becoming a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, shall be
blessed in his doing.
26 If any one seems to be religious, not bridling his tongue but
deceiving his own heart, this man’s religion is vain.
27 Religion pure, and undefiled with God and the Father is this, to
visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, to keep himself
unspotted from the world.
James 2
1 My brethren, hold not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ of glory
with respect of persons.
2 For if there come into your assembly a man with a gold ring on his
finger, in splendid raiment, and there come in also a poor man in vile
raiment,
3 and you look upon him that wears the splendid raiment, and say:
Sit thou here honorably; and say to the poor man: Stand there, or sit
under my footstool,
4 do you not then make distinctions among yourselves, and have you
not become judges having evil thoughts?
5 Hear, my beloved brethren. Has not God chosen the poor in the
world, rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom which he has promised
to those that love him?
6 But you have dishonored the poor man. Do not the rich act as lords
over you, and do not they themselves drag you to the judgment-
seats?
7 Do not they themselves blaspheme that honorable name that has
been called upon you?
8 If, however, you fulfill the royal law according to the Scripture;
Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself, you do well:
9 but if you have respect for persons, you work sin, being convinced
by the law as transgressors.
10 For whoever shall have kept the whole law, but shall have
offended in one, has become guilty of all.410
Codex Sinaiticus:
11 For he that said: Thou shalt not commit adultery, said also: Thou
shalt not kill: now, if thou commit no adultery, but if thou kill, thou
hast become a transgressor of the law.
12 So speak and so act as those, that shall be judged by the law of
liberty.
13 For the judgment is merciless to him that has shown no mercy:
mercy glories over judgment.
14 What is the profit, my brethren, if any one say that he has faith,
but has not works? Can his faith save him?
15 But if a brother or sister be naked and want daily food,
16 and any one of you say to them: Depart in peace, be warmed and
be filled, but give them not the things needful for the body, what is
the profit?
17 So also faith, if it have not works, is dead in itself.
18 But some one will say: Thou hast faith, and I have works: show me
thy faith without the works, and I will show thee my faith by the
works.
19 Dost thou believe that God is one? thou doest well: the demons
also believe and tremble.
20 But wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is idle?
21 Was not Abraham our father justified by works, when he offered
up Isaac his son on the altar?
22 Thou seest that faith worked with his works, and by the works the
faith was made perfect;
23 and the Scripture was fulfilled which says: And Abraham believed
God, and it was counted to him for righteousness, and he was called
the friend of God.
24 You see that a man is justified by works, and not by faith only.
25 But in like manner also was not Rahab the harlot justified by
works, when she received the messengers and sent them forth by a
different way?
26 For as the body without spirit is dead, so also faith without works
is dead.
James 3
1 Become not many teachers, my brethren, knowing that we shall
revive greater condemnation.
2 For in many things we all offend: if any one offends not in word, he
is a perfect man, able to bridle also the whole body.
3 But if we put bits into the mouths of horses that they may obey us,
we also turn about their whole body:The H. T. Anderson New Testament
411
4 behold, also, the ships, though they are so great, and are driven by
fierce winds, yet are they turned about by a very small rudder, to
whatever point the will of the pilot may direct.
5 So also the tongue is a little member and boasts great things.
Behold, how great a matter how small a fire, the tongue, kindles.
6 A fire, the world of unrighteousness, the tongue is set among our
members, which also defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the
wheel of nature, and is set on fire by hell.
7 For every nature of wild beasts, and of birds, and of creeping
things, and things in the sea is tamed, and has been tamed by human
nature,
8 but the tongue no one of men is able to tame: a restless evil, full of
deadly poison.
9 With it we bless the Lord and Father, and with it we curse men who
have been made according to the likeness of God:
10 out of the same mouth comes forth blessing and cursing. These
things, my brethren, ought not so to be.
11 Does a fountain send forth from the same opening sweet water and
bitter?
12 Can a fig-tree, my brethren, produce olives, or a vine, figs? Neither
can salt water produce sweet.
13 Who is wise and intelligent among you? Let him show out of a
good behavior his works in meekness of wisdom.
14 But if you have bitter envy and strife in your heart, glory not and
lie not against the truth.
15 This wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual,
demoniacal.
16 For where envy and strife are, there is tumult and every evil work.
17 But the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, easy to be persuaded, full of mercy and good fruits, without
partiality, without hypocrisy.
18 But the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace by them that make
peace.
James 4
1 Whence wars and whence fightings among you? Are they not
hence, from your lusts that war in your members?
2 You desire, and have not; you murder and envy, and cannot obtain:
you fight and war. You have not because you ask not:
3 you ask and receive not, because you ask amiss, that you, adulterers
and adulteresses, may spend it on your lusts.
4 Know you not that the friendship of the world is enmity to God?
Whoever, then, intends to be a friend of the world, makes himself an
enemy of God.412
Codex Sinaiticus:
5 Think you that the Scripture speaks to no purpose? Against envy
the Spirit that has taken up its abode in us has jealous desires,
6 but gives greater grace. Wherefore it says: God sets himself against
the proud, but gives grace to the lowly.
7 Submit yourselves, therefore, to God; resist the devil, and he will
flee from you:
8 draw near to God, and he will draw near to you. Cleanse your
hands, you sinners, and purify your hearts, you of two minds.
9 Afflict yourselves and mourn and weep: let your laughter be turned
into mourning, and your joy into sadness.
10 Humble yourselves in the sight of the Lord, and he will exalt you.
11 Speak not evil one of another, brethren. He that speaks evil of his
brother, or judges his brother, speaks evil of the law and judges the
law; but if thou judgest the law, thou art not a doer of the law, but a
judge.
12 The lawgiver and the judge is one, who is able to save and to
destroy: who art thou, that judgest thy neighbor?
13 Come now you that say: Today and to-morrow we will go to such a
city, and spend there one year, and trade’ and make gain,
14 you that know not what will be to-morrow; for what is your life?
For you are a vapor that appears for a little while and then
disappears:
15 instead of which you should say: If the Lord will, we shall both
live, and do this or that.
16 But now you glory in your boastings: all such glorying is evil.
17 To him, then, that knows to do good and does it not, to him it is
sin.
James 5
1 Come now you that are rich, weep, howl for your miseries that are
coming on you.
2 Your riches are corrupted, and your garments have become moth-
eaten;
3 your gold and silver is eaten with rust, and the rust of them will be
a testimony to you, and will eat your flesh as fire. You have heaped
up treasure in the last days.
4 Behold, the hire of the laborers that have reaped your fields, which
has remained unpaid by you, cries; and the cries of the reapers have
entered into the ears of the Lord of hosts.
5 You have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton: you have
nourished your hearts in a day of slaughter.
6 You condemned, you killed the Just One: he does not resist you.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
413
7 Be patient, therefore, brethren till the coming of the Lord. Behold,
the farmer waits for the precious fruit of the earth, being patient over
it till he receive the early and latter rain:
8 be you also patient, strengthen your hearts, for the coming of the
Lord draws near.
9 Complain not, brethren, one against another, lest you be
condemned: behold, the judge stands before the door.
10 Take, brethren, the prophets, who spoke in the name of the Lord,
as an example of suffering evil and of patience.
11 Behold, we call those happy that endure: you have heard of the
patience of Job and have seen the end of the Lord, that the Lord is
very compassionate and merciful.
12 But above all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven,
nor by the earth, nor by any other oath; but let your yes be yes, and
no be no, that you fall not under condemnation.
13 Does any one among you suffer evil? Let him pray: is any one
cheerful? Let him sing psalms.
14 Is anyone among you sick? Let him call for the elders of the
church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the
name of the Lord.
15 And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise
him up; and if he have committed sins, it shall be forgiven him.
16 Confess your sins one to another, and pray one for another, that
you may be restored to health: the prayer of a righteous man, being
energetic, avails much.
17 Elijah was a man with passions like ourselves, and he prayed
earnestly that it might not rain, and it rained not on the earth for
three years and six months;
18 and again he prayed, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth
yielded its fruit.
19 Brethren, if any one among you go astray from the truth, and one
turn him back,
20 let him know that he that turns a sinner back from the error of his
ways shall save a soul from death, and cover a multitude of sins.414
Codex Sinaiticus:
Epistle of Peter 1st
1 Peter 1
1 Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the elect sojourners of the
dispersion of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia,
2 according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, in sanctification
of the Spirit, in order to obedience and the sprinkling of the blood of
Jesus Christ. Grace to you and peace be multiplied.
3 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who,
according to his great mercy, has begotten us again to a living hope,
through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,
4 for an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled and unfading,
reserved in heaven for you,
5 who in the power of God are kept through faith to the salvation
ready to be revealed in the last time.
6 In which you rejoice, being now for a little while, if need be,
sorrowful in diversified temptations,
7 that the proof of your faith, much more precious than gold that
perishes, though tried by fire, may be found for praise and glory and
honor in the revelation of Jesus Christ,
8 whom not seeing, you love; on whom not now looking but
believing, you rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious,
9 receiving the end of your faith, the salvation of your souls.
10 Concerning which salvation the prophets that prophesied of the
grace that was for you, earnestly sought and inquired,
11 inquiring into what and what kind of time the Spirit of Christ that
was in them did signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings
that were for Christ, and the glories after these;
12 to whom it was revealed, that not for themselves, but for you, they
were ministering these things, which are now announced to you
through those that preached the gospel to you by the Holy Spirit sent
down from heaven, into which things angels desire earnestly to look.
13 Wherefore, gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope
perfectly for the grace to be brought to you in the revelation of Jesus
Christ.
14 As children of obedience, not fashioning yourselves according to
the desires which you formerly had in your ignorance,
15 but as he that called you is holy, become yourselves also holy in all
behavior,
16 because it is written: Be you holy, for I am holy.
17 And if you call on, as a Father, him who judges without respect of
persons, according to each one’s work, spend the time of your
sojourning in fear;The H. T. Anderson New Testament
415
18 knowing that not with corruptible things, as silver and gold, you
were redeemed from your fruitless mode of life delivered to you by
your fathers;
19 but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb blameless and
without spot;
20 foreknown indeed before the foundation of the world, but
manifested in the last of the times for you,
21 who through him do believe in God who raised him from the dead,
and gave him glory, so that your faith and hope are in God.
22 Having purified your souls in obedience to the truth, to unfeigned
love of the brethren, love one another from the heart earnestly,
23 having been begotten again, not of corruptible seed, but of
incorruptible, by means of the word of God that lives and abides.
24 Because all flesh is as grass, and all its glory as the flower of grass;
the grass withers, and the flower of it falls;
25 but the word of the Lord abides for ever. And this is the word
which as gospel has been preached to you.
1 Peter 2
1 Having, then, laid aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies,
and envies, and all evil speakings,
2 as babes just born, earnestly desire the spiritual unadulterated
milk, that by it you may grow to salvation,
3 if indeed you have tasted that the Lord is good.
4 To whom coming, a living stone, by men indeed disapproved, but
with God chosen, precious,
5 yourselves also as living stones are builded up, a spiritual house, a
holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God
through Jesus Christ;
6 because it is contained in Scripture: Behold, I lay in Zion a chief
corner-stone, chosen, precious, and he that believes on him shall not
be ashamed.
7 To you, therefore, that believe is the preciousness; but to those that
believe not, a stone which the builders rejected, this became the head
of the corner, and a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense,
8 to them that stumble at the word being disobedient, to which also
they were appointed.
9 But you are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a
purchased people, that you should show forth the virtues of him that
has called you out of darkness into his wonderful light:
10 who once were not a people, but now are the people of God, who
had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy.
11 Beloved, I beseech that you as strangers and sojourners abstain
from fleshly desires, which war against the soul,416
Codex Sinaiticus:
12 having your conduct among the Gentiles, that in what they speak
against you as evildoers, they may, because of your good works, while
beholding them, glorify God in the day of visitation.
13 Be subject, therefore, to every human creation for the Lord’s sake;
whether to the king as supreme,
14 or to governors as sent by him for the punishment of evil-doers,
but the praise of those that do good;
15 for so is the will of God that by doing good you may put to silence
the ignorance of foolish men:
16 as free, and not holding freedom as a cloak of malice, but as the
servants of God.
17 Honor all men, love the brotherhood, fear God, honor the king.
18 Household servants, be subject in all fear to your masters, not
only to the good and gentle, but also to the perverse.
19 For this is praiseworthy, if because of consciousness of God any
one endures sorrows, suffering wrongfully.
20 For what glory is there, if, being buffeted for your faults, you take
it patiently? But if, when you do well and suffer, you take it patiently,
this is praiseworthy with God.
21 For to this end were you called, because Christ also suffered for
you, leaving you an example that you should follow his steps;
22 who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth;
23 who when reviled reviled not in turn, when suffering he
threatened not, but committed his cause to him that judges
righteously,
24 who himself bore our sins in his own body on the tree, that having
died to sins we should live to righteousness; by whose stripes you
were healed;
25 for you were as sheep going astray, but have now returned to the
shepherd and overseer of your souls.
1 Peter 3
1 Likewise, wives, be subject to your own husbands, that even if any
obey not the word, they may without the word be gained through the
conduct of the wives,
2 having beheld your conduct that is chaste in fear.
3 Whose adorning let it not be the outward, of braiding the hair, and
of putting around of golden ornaments or of putting en of dresses,
4 but the hidden man of the heart in the incorruptible ornament of
the meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price.
5 For so in former time also the holy women that hoped in God
adorned themselves, being in subjection to their own husbands,The H. T. Anderson New Testament
417
6 as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord; whose children you
have become by doing good and not being afraid of any terror.
7 Husbands, likewise, dwell according to knowledge with the
feminine as the weaker vessel, bestowing honor as on those that are
also heirs with you of the grace of life, that your prayers be not
hindered.
8 Finally, be all of the same mind, sympathetic, loving the brethren,
compassionate, humble-minded,
9 not rendering evil for evil or railing for railing, but, on the other
hand, blessing; because to this end were you called, that you might
inherit blessing.
10 For he that will love life and see good days, let him refrain his
tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile;
11 let him turn away from evil and do good; let him seek peace and
pursue it;
12 because the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears
incline to their prayer; but the face of the Lord is against them that
do evil.
13 And who is he that will do you evil if you become zealots for that
which is good?
14 But if you should even suffer for the sake of righteousness, you are
happy. But fear not their fear, neither be troubled;
15 but sanctify the Lord Christ in your hearts, and be ready always to
give an answer to every one that asks you a reason concerning the
hope that is in you; but with meekness and fear;
16 having a good conscience, that in what you are evil spoken of, they
may be ashamed who falsely accuse your good conduct in Christ.
17 For it is better to suffer for doing good, if the will of God should
will it, than for doing evil.
18 For Christ also once suffered for sins, a just man for unjust men,
that he might bring us to God, having been indeed put to death in
flesh, but made alive in spirit,
19 in which also he went and preached to the spirits in prison,
20 that were disobedient once when the longsuffering of God waited
in the days of Noah, while an ark was prepared, in which few, that is,
eight souls, were saved through water.
21 Which (water) in its antitype, baptism, now saves you also (not the
putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the inquiry of a good
conscience toward God), through the resurrection of Jesus Christ,
22 who is at the right hand of God, having gone into heaven, angels
and authorities and powers being made subject to him.
1 Peter 4418
Codex Sinaiticus:
1 Christ then having suffered in the flesh, do you also arm yourselves
with the same mind, because he that has suffered in the flesh has
ceased from sin,
2 that you may no longer live the rest of your time in the flesh to the
desires of men, but to the will of God.
3 For the time past is sufficient to have worked the will of the
Gentiles, in having walked in lasciviousness, desires, wine-drinkings,
carousals, banquetings, and lawless idolatries;
4 at which they are astonished, since you run out with them into the
same confusion of riot, speaking evil of you,
5 who shall give an account to him that is ready to judge the living
and dead.
6 For to this end was the gospel preached even to the dead, that they
might indeed be judged according to men in the flesh, but live
according to God in the spirit.
7 But the end of all things is at hand. Be sober-minded, therefore,
and be watchful that you may pray;
8 above all things have earnest love towards one another, for love
covers a multitude of sins;
9 be hospitable one towards another without murmuring;
10 as each one has received a gracious gift, minister the same one to
another as good stewards of the diversified grace of God;
11 if any one speaks, as the oracles of God: if any one ministers, as
from the strength that God supplies, that in all things God may be
glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom is glory and might from age
to age: amen.
12 Beloved, be not astonished at the fiery trial that is among you, that
has come upon you for a trial, as if a strange thing is happening to
you,
13 but as far as you partake of the sufferings of Christ, rejoice, that
also in the revelation of his glory you may rejoice with gladness.
14 It you are reproached * in the name of Christ, happy are you,
because the spirit of glory and of God rests upon you.
* Because you wear the name.
15 For let not any one of you suffer as a murderer, or a thief, or an
evil-doer, or as a busybody in other men’s matters;
16 but if he suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him
glorify God in this name.
17 For it is the time that judgment should begin at the house of God;
but if first at us, what shall be the end of those that obey not the
gospel of God?
18 And if the righteous man is scarcely saved, the ungodly and
sinner, where shall he appear?The H. T. Anderson New Testament
419
19 So, then, let them also that suffer according to the will of God
commit their souls to him in well-doing, as to a faithful creator.
1 Peter 5
1 Elders that are among you I exhort who am the fellow-elder, and a
witness of the sufferings of Christ, who also am a partaker of the
glory that shall be revealed:
2 be shepherds to the flock of God that is among you, not from
necessity, but willingly, according to God, not for the sake of base
gain, but readily,
3 neither as being lords of the portions,* but becoming examples to
the flock;
*The parts of the flock under their care.
4 and when the chief shepherd shall appear, you shall receive the
crown of glory that fades not away.
5 Likewise, you younger, submit yourselves to the elder, yes, do you
all clothe yourselves with humility one towards another; for God sets
himself against the proud, but gives grace to the lowly.
6 Humble yourselves therefore under the strong hand of God, that he
may exalt you in due time,
7 casting all your care upon him, for he cares for you.
8 Be sober, be watchful. Your adversary, the devil, as a roaring lion,
walks about, seeking whom he may devour:
9 whom resist firm in faith, knowing that the same sufferings are
accomplished in your brethren that are in the world.
10 But the God of all grace, who has called you to his eternal glory in
Christ, after you have suffered awhile, will himself make you perfect,
establish, strengthen, confirm you.
11 To him be might through the ages, amen.
12 By Silvanus to you the faithful brother, as I suppose, I have
written in few words, exhorting, and testifying that this is the true
grace of God, in which you stand.
13 She that is elected together with you in Babylon salute you, and so
does Mark my son.
14 Salute one another with a kiss of love. Peace to you all that are in
Christ.420
Codex Sinaiticus:
Epistle of Peter 2nd
2 Peter 1
1 Simon Peter, a servant and apostle of Jesus Christ, to those that
have obtained equally precious faith with us in the righteousness of
our God and Saviour Jesus Christ.
2 Grace to you and peace be multiplied in the acknowledgment of
God and Jesus our Lord.
3 As his divine power has given us all things that pertain to life and
godliness, through the acknowledgment of him who has called us by
his own glory and virtue,
4 through which very great and precious promises have been given to
us, that through these you might become partakers of the divine
nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world in desire;
5 and for this very reason bringing forward all diligence, supply in
your faith, virtue, and in virtue, knowledge,
6 and in knowledge, self-control, and in self-control, patience, and in
patience, godliness,
7 and in godliness, friendship for brethren, and in friendship for
brethren, love.
8 For these things being in you and abounding render you neither
idle, nor unfruitful for the acknowledgment of our Lord Jesus Christ;
9 but he in whom these are not present, is blind, not seeing afar off,
having taken up a forgetfulness of the purification of his old sins.
10 Wherefore the rather, brethren, be diligent to make your calling
and election sure; for in doing these things you shall never stumble.
11 For so shall there be richly supplied to you the entrance into the
eternal kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.
12 Wherefore I shall always remind you of these things, though you
know them and are established in the present truth.
13 Yes, I think it right, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you
up by putting you in remembrance,
14 knowing that shortly I must put off this my tabernacle, even as our
Lord Jesus Christ has shown me.
15 But I will endeavor that you may always be able, after my
departure, to have these things in remembrance.
16 For we did not follow cunningly devised fables when we made
known to you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but
had been made eye-witnesses of his majesty.
17 For he received from God the Father honor and glory, a voice
having been borne to him by the most excellent glory, such as this:
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.
18 And this voice brought from heaven we heard, being with him in
the holy mount;The H. T. Anderson New Testament
421
19 and we have the prophetic word more sure, to which you do well
to give heed, as to a lamp shining in a dark place, till the day dawn
and the day-star arise in your hearts;
20 knowing this first, that no prophecy of Scripture comes from one’s
own interpretation.
21 For not by the will of man was prophecy ever brought, but men
from God spoke, being moved by the Holy Spirit.
2 Peter 2
1 But there arose false prophets among the people, as there shall be
false teachers also among you, such as shall privily introduce heresies
of destruction, even denying the Lord that bought them, who bring
on themselves swift destruction;
2 and many will follow their licentiousness, because of whom the way
of truth shall be blasphemed;
3 and in covetousness with deceitful words they will make
merchandise of you; for whom the condemnation of old lingers not,
and their destruction slumbers not.
4 For if God spared not the angels that sinned, but casting them
down to Tartarus in chains of darkness delivered them up to be kept
for judgment,
5 and spared not the old world, but preserved Noah, the eighth
person, a preacher of righteousness, having brought a flood on the
world of the ungodly,
6 and turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes,
condemned them with an overthrow, making them an example of
those that shall live ungodly,
7 and delivered righteous Lot, wearied out with the licentious
conduct of the ungodly;
8 for the righteous man dwelling among them, by seeing and hearing,
vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their lawless deeds:
9 the Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation, and to
keep the unrighteous to the day of judgment to be punished,
10 but especially those that walk after the flesh in unclean desire, and
despise governments. Presumptuous, self-willed men, they tremble
not while blaspheming dignities;
11 whereas angels, who are greater in strength and power, bring no
railing accusation against them before the Lord;
12 but these, as irrational animals made by nature for capture and
destruction, speaking evil of things in which they are ignorant, shall
also perish in their corruption,
13 thus receiving the reward of unrighteousness, who count reveling
in the daytime a delight; spots and blemishes they are reveling in
their deceits while feasting with you,422
Codex Sinaiticus:
14 having eyes full of an adulteress, and that can not cease from sin,
seducing unsteady souls, having a heart exercised in covetousness,
children of the curse:
15 having left the straight way, they have turned aside, following the
way of Balaam the son of Beor, who loved the wages of
unrighteousness,
16 but was reproved for his iniquity: the dumb beast of burden
speaking with man’s voice forbade the madness of the prophet.
17 These are wells without water, and mists driven by a tempest, for
whom the blackness of darkness is reserved.
18 For speaking great swelling words of vanity, they seduce in the
desires of the flesh by lasciviousness those that are just escaping
from them that live in error,
19 promising them freedom, while they themselves are servants of
corruption; for by whom any one has been overcome, by him has he
also been made a servant.
20 For if, after escaping from the pollutions of the world through the
knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they are again
entangled in these and overcome, their last state becomes worse than
the first.
21 For it had been better for them not to have known the way of
righteousness, than having known it to turn from the holy
commandment that had been delivered to them.
22 That of the true proverb has happened to them: A dog turned back
to his own vomit; and: A sow washed to wallowing in the mire.
2 Peter 3
1 This now, beloved, is the second epistle that I write to you, in both
of which I stir up your pure mind by way of remembrance,
2 that you be mindful of the words spoken before by the holy
prophets, and of the commandment of the Lord and Saviour, that
was given by your apostles,
3 knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days shameless
scoffers walking according to their own desires,
4 and saying: Where is the promise of his coming? For since the
fathers fell asleep, all things thus continue from the beginning of the
creation.
5 For this they willingly know not, that the heavens were of old and
the earth from water and by means of water consisting by the word of
God,
6 by which the then world, having been overflowed with water,
perished;The H. T. Anderson New Testament
423
7 but the present heavens and earth are kept in store by the same
word, reserved for fire at the day of judgment and perdition of
ungodly men.
8 But be not ignorant of this one thing, beloved, that one day with the
Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.
9 The Lord delays not concerning the promise, as some count
delaying, but is longsuffering for your sake, not willing that any
should perish, but that all should come to repentance.
10 But the day of the Lord will come as a thief, in which the heavens
shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with
fervent heat, and the earth and the works that are in it shall be
burned up.
11 As all these things are thus to be dissolved, what manner of
persons ought you to be in holy behavior and godliness,
12 looking for and hastening the coming of the day of God, because of
which the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved and the elements
shall melt with fervent heat?
13 But we, according to his promise, look for new heavens and a new
earth, in which dwells righteousness.
14 Wherefore, beloved, as you look for these things, be diligent to be
found spotless and blameless before him in peace,
15 and regard the longsuffering of our Lord salvation, even as our
beloved brother Paul, according to the wisdom that is given to him,
has written to you,
16 as also in all his epistles speaking in them of these things, in which
things are some hard to be understood, which the unlearned and
unsteady wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures, to their own
destruction.
17 Do you then, beloved, knowing it before, beware lest being led
away by the error of the lawless you fall from your own steadfastness,
18 but grow in grace and the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ. To him be glory both now and to the day of eternity.424
Codex Sinaiticus:
Epistle of John 1st
1 John 1
1 That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we
have seen with our eyes, which we looked upon and our hands
handled, of the word of life;
2 and the life was manifested, and we have seen and do testify and
declare to you the life eternal, which was with the Father and was
manifested to us:
3 that which we have seen and heard, declare we to you, that you also
may have fellowship with us. And our fellowship indeed is with the
Father and with his Son Jesus Christ.
4 And these things write we to you, that your joy may be made full.
5 And this is the message that we have heard from him, and declare
again to you, that God is light and darkness in him there is none.
6 If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness,
we lie and do not the truth;
7 but if we walk in the light as he himself is in the light, we have
fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus his Son cleanses
us from all sin.
8 If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves and the truth is
not in us.
9 If we confess our sins, faithful is he and righteous to forgive us the
sins and cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
10 If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his
word is not in us,
1 John 2
1 My little children, these things write I to you that you sin not. And if
any one sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous;
2 and he himself is the expiation for our sins, not for ours only,
however, but also for the whole world.
3 And in this we know that we have known him, if we keep his
commandments.
4 He that says: I have known him and keeps not his commandments
is a liar, and the truth is not in him;
5 but whoever keeps his word, truly in him has the love of God been
perfected. In this we know that we are in him.
6 He that says that he abides in him ought himself also so to walk as
he walked.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
425
7 Beloved, no new commandment write I to you, but an old
commandment, which you had from the beginning: the old
commandment is the word which you heard.
8 Again a new commandment write I to you, which thing is true in
him and in you, because the darkness is passing away and the true
light now shines.
9 He that says that he is in the light, and hates his brother, is in
darkness till now.
10 He that loves his brother abides in the light, and there is no
stumbling-block in him;
11 but he that hates his brother is in darkness, and walks in darkness,
and knows not whither he goes, because darkness has blinded his
eyes.
12 I write to you, little children, because your sins have been forgiven
for his name’s sake.
13 I write to you, fathers, because you have known him that is from
the beginning. I write to you, young men, because you have overcome
the wicked one. I have written to you, little children, because you
have known the Father.
14 I have written to you, fathers, because you have known him that is
from the beginning. I have written to you, young men, because you
are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and you have
overcome the wicked one,
15 Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any
one love the world, the love of the Father is not in him;
16 because all that is in the world, the desire of the flesh and the
desire of the eyes and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of
the world
17 And the world is passing away and the desire of it; but he that does
the will of God abides for ever.
18 Little children, it is the last time, and as you heard that antichrist
comes, even now many antichrists have risen: whence we know that
it is the last time.
19 They went out from us, but were not of us; for if they had been of
us, they would have remained with us; but that they might be made
manifest that they are all not of us.
20 And you have an anointing from the holy One, and know all
things.
21 I have not written to you because you know not the truth, but
because you know it, and that no lie is from the truth.
22 Who is the liar, but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ? This is
the antichrist that denies the Father and the Son.
23 Every one that denies the Son, neither has he the Father: he that
confesses the Son has the Father also.426
Codex Sinaiticus:
24 Let that which you heard from the beginning abide in you. If that
abide in you which you heard from the beginning, you also shall
abide in the Son and in the Father.
25 And this is the promise that he himself promised us, the life
eternal.
26 These things I have written to you concerning them that deceive
you.
27 And you — the anointing which you received from him abides in
you, and you have no need that any one teach, but as his anointing
teaches you concerning all things, and is true and is no lie, even as it
has taught you, abide in it.
28 And now, little children, abide in him that when he shall be
manifested we may have boldness, and not be ashamed away from
him in his coming.
29 If you know that he is righteous, you know that every one also that
works righteousness has been begotten of him.
1 John 3
1 Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed on us that we
should be called children of God. Therefore the world knows us not,
because it knew him not.
2 Beloved, now are we children of God, and it has not yet been made
manifest what we shall be. We know that when it shall be made
manifest we shall be like him, because we, shall see him as he is.
3 And every one that has this hope on him purifies himself, as he is
pure.
4 Every one that practices sin practices lawlessness also, and sin is
lawlessness.
5 And you know that he was manifested that he might take away sins,
and sin is not in him.
6 Every one that abides in him sins not: whoever sins has not seen
him, neither known him.
7 Little children, let no one deceive you. He that practices
righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous:
8 he that practices sin is of the devil, because the devil sins from the
beginning. For this purpose was the Son of God manifested, that he
might destroy the works of the devil.
9 Whoever has been begotten of God does not practice sin, because
his seed abides in him; and he can not sin, because he has been
begotten of God.
10 In this the children of God are manifest and the children of the
devil: whoever practices not righteousness is not of God, also he that
loves not his brother.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
427
11 For this is the message that you heard from the beginning, that we
should love one another,
12 not as Cain was of the wicked one and slew his brother; and for
what cause did he slay him? because his works were evil, but those of
his brother righteous.
13 Wonder not, brethren, if the world hates you.
14 We know that we have passed from death into life, because we
love the brethren: he that loves not abides in death.
15 Whoever hates his brother is a murderer, and you know that no
murderer has eternal life abiding in him.
16 In this we have known the love, because he laid down his life for
us; and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren.
17 But whoever has this world’s goods, and sees his brother have
need, and shuts up his bowels from him, how abides the love of God
in him?
18 Little children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in
deed and in truth.
19 And in this we know that we are of the truth, and shall persuade
our hearts before him;
20 because if our hearts condemn us, God is greater than our heart,
and knows all things.
21 Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, we have confidence toward
God,
22 and whatever we ask we receive from him, because we keep his
commandments and do the things that are pleasing in his sight.
23 And this is his commandment, that we should believe on the name
of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another as he gave us
commandment.
24 And he that keeps his commandments abides in him and he in
him; and in this we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit that he
has given us.
1 John 4
1 Beloved, believe not every spirit, but prove the spirits, whether they
are from God; because many false prophets have gone forth into the
world.
2 In this know you the Spirit of God: every spirit that confesses that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God,
3 and every spirit that confesses not Jesus is not of God; and this is
the spirit of antichrist, of which you have heard that it comes, and
now is in the world already.
4 You are of God, little children, and have overcome them, because
greater is he that is in you than he that is in the world.428
Codex Sinaiticus:
5 They are of the world: therefore they speak of the world, and the
world hears them.
6 We are of God: he that knows God hears us, he that is not of God
hears not us. By this we know the spirit of truth and the spirit of
error.
7 Beloved, let us love one another, because love is of God, and every
one that loves has been begotten of God, and knows God.
8 He that loves not has not known God, for God is love.
9 In this has been manifested the love of God in us, that God has sent
his Son the only Begotten into the world that we might live through
him.
10 In this is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and
sent his Son the expiation for our sins.
11 Beloved, if God so loved us, we also ought to love one another.
12 No one has seen God at any time: if we love one another, God
abides in us and his love is perfected in us.
13 In this we know that we abide in him and he in us, because he has
given us of his Spirit.
14 And we have seen and do testify that the Father has sent the Son
the Saviour of the world.
15 Whoever confesses that Jesus is the Son of God, God abides in him
and he in God.
16 And we have known and have believed the love that God has in us.
God is love, and he that abides in love abides in God and God in him.
17 In this has been perfected the love with us, that we may have
boldness in the day of judgment, because as he is we also are in this
world.
18 Fear is not in love, but perfect love casts out fear, because fear has
punishment, but he that fears is not made perfect in love.
19 We love, because he first loved us.
20 If any one say: I love God, and hate his brother, he is a liar; for he
that loves not his brother, whom he has seen, God, whom he has not
seen, how can he love?
21 And this commandment have we from him, that he that loves God
loves his brother also.
1 John 5
1 Every one that believes that Jesus is the Christ, has been begotten
of God; and every one that loves him that begot, loves him also that
has been begotten of him.
2 In this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God
and do his commandments.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
429
3 For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments; and
his commandments are not burdensome,
4 because all that has been begotten of God overcomes the world;
and this is the victory that overcomes the world, our faith.
5 Who is he that overcomes the world but he that believes that Jesus
is the Son of God?
6 This is he that came through water and blood, Jesus Christ: not in
the water only, but in the water and in the blood; and it is the Spirit
that testifies, because the Spirit is the truth.
7 For they that testify are three,
8 the Spirit, and the water, and the blood, and the three are one.*
* Testify the same thing
9 If we receive the testimony of men, the testimony of God is greater;
because this is the testimony of God that he has testified concerning
his Son.
10 He that believes on the Son of God has the testimony in himself:
he that believes not God has made him a liar, because he has not
believed on the testimony that God has testified concerning his Son.
11 And this is the testimony, that God gave us eternal life, and this
life is in his Son.
12 He that has the Son has the life: he that has not the Son of God has
not the life.
13 These things have I written to you that you may know that you
have eternal life, who believe on the name of the Son of God.
14 And this is the confidence that we have towards him, that if we ask
anything according to his will, he hears us.
15 And if we know that he hears us as to whatever we ask, we know
that we have the petition that we have asked of him.
16 If any one see his brother sinning a sin not to death, he shall ask,
and shall give him life, to those that sin not to death. There is a sin to
death: not concerning this do I say that he should ask.
17 All unrighteousness is sin, and there is a sin not to death.
18 We know that every one that has been begotten of God sins not;
but he that has been begotten of God keeps himself, and the wicked
one touches him not.
19 We know that we are of God, and the whole world lies in the
wicked one.
20 We know, however, that the Son of God has come, and has given
us understanding, that we know him that is true; and we are in him
that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ: This is the true God and life
eternal.
21 Little children, keep yourselves from idols.430
Codex Sinaiticus:
Epistle of John 2nd
2 John
1 The elder to the elect lady and her children, whom I love in truth,
and not I only, but also all that have known the truth,
2 because of this truth that abides in us, and shall be with us for ever.
3 There shall be with you grace, mercy, peace, from God the Father,
and from the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, in truth and
love.
4 I rejoiced greatly that I have found of thy children walking in the
truth as we received commandment from the Father.
5 And now I beseech thee, lady, not as writing to thee a new
commandment, but that which we had from the beginning, that we
love one another.
6 And this is love, that we walk according to his commandments: the
commandment is this: as you heard from the beginning, that you
walk in it.
7 For many deceivers have gone out into the world, who confess not
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh: this is the deceiver and the
antichrist.
8 Take heed to yourselves, that you lose not the things that you have
wrought, but that you receive a full reward.
9 Whoever advances and abides not in the teaching of Christ has not
God: he that abides in the teaching, he has both the Son and Father.
10 If any one comes to you, and brings not this teaching, receive him
not into the house, and wish him not well;
11 for he that wishes well is partaker in his evil deeds.
12 Having many things to write to you, I would not by means of
paper and ink; but I hope to be with you, and speak mouth to mouth,
that our joy may be full.
13 The children of thy elect sister salute thee.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
431432
Codex Sinaiticus:
Epistle of John 3rd
3 John
1 The elder to the beloved Gaius, whom I love in truth.
2 Beloved, concerning all things I pray that thou mayest prosper and
be in health, as thy soul prospers.
3 For I rejoiced greatly when the brethren came and testified to thy
truth, as thou walkest in the truth.
4 I have no joy greater than this, that I hear of my children walking in
the truth.
5 Beloved, thou doest faithfully whatever thou workest for the
brethren, and for strangers,
6 who have testified to thy love before the church, whom thou wilt do
well in conducting forward in a manner worthy of God.
7 For in behalf of the name they went forth, taking nothing from the
heathen.
8 We then, ought to receive such, that we may become fellow-
workmen for the truth.
9 I wrote somewhat to the church; but Diotrephes, who loves the pre-
eminence over them, receives us not.
10 Wherefore, if I come, I will bring to remembrance the works that
he does, prating against us with evil words; and not content with this,
he neither himself receives the brethren, and those that would he
hinders and casts out of the church.
11 Beloved, imitate not that which is evil, but that which is good. He
that does good is of God: he that does evil has not seen God.
12 To Demetrius good testimony is given by all and by the truth itself;
and we also testify, and you know that our testimony is true.
13 I had many things to write to thee, but I will not write to thee by
means of ink and pen:
14 I hope, however, to see thee soon, and we will speak mouth to
mouth.
15 Peace to thee. The friends salute thee: salute the friends by name.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
433434
Codex Sinaiticus:
Epistle of Jude
Jude
1 Jude, a servant of Christ Jesus, but brother of James, to the called
that are beloved in God the Father, and kept for Jesus Christ.
2 Mercy to you and peace and love be multiplied.
3 Beloved, giving all diligence to write to you concerning this
common salvation, I found it necessary to write to you, exhorting you
to contend for the faith once delivered to the saints.
4 For some men have come in by stealth, who have long ago been
written of beforehand for this condemnation; ungodly men, turning
the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying our only
Master and Lord, Jesus Christ.
5 But I wish to put you in remembrance, though you already know all
things, that the Lord, after having saved the people from the land of
Egypt, the second time destroyed those that believed not:
6 angels also that kept not their first estate, but left their own
habitation, he has kept in eternal chains under darkness for the
judgment of the great day:
7 how Sodom and Gomorrah and the cities about them, giving
themselves over to lewdness in like manner with these men, and
having gone after other flesh, are set forth as an example, suffering
the punishment of eternal fire.
8 Yet still in like manner these dreamers also defile indeed the flesh,
but despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities.
9 But Michael the archangel, when contending with the devil he
disputed about the body of Moses, dared not to bring a railing
accusation, but said: The Lord rebuke thee.
10 But these speak evil of whatever things indeed they know not, but
whatever things they understand naturally as the irrational animals,
in these they corrupt themselves.
11 Alas for them, for in the way of Cain they have walked, and in the
error of Balaam they have rushed headlong for hire, and in the
contradiction of Corah have they perished.
12 These are they that are rocks in your love-feasts, feasting with you
without fear, feeding themselves; clouds without water, driven
rapidly by winds; late autumnal trees without fruit, twice dead, torn
up by the roots;
13 raging waves of the sea foaming up their own shame; wandering
stars, for whom the blackness of darkness has been kept forever.
14 But of these also prophesied Enoch, the seventh from Adam,
saying: Behold, the Lord came in his holy myriads,
15 to execute judgment against all, and to convince all that are
ungodly among them of all their ungodly works in which they wereThe H. T. Anderson New Testament
435
ungodly, and of all the hard things which ungodly sinners have
spoken against him.
16 These are murmurers, complainers, walking according to their
own desires, and their mouth speaks great swelling words, admiring
persons for profit’s sake.
17 But you, beloved, be mindful of the words that were spoken before
by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ,
18 that they said that at the last time there shall be scoffers walking
according to their own desires in ungodliness.
19 These are they that separate, psychical, not having spirit.
20 But you, beloved, building yourselves up on your most holy faith,
praying in the Holy Spirit,
21 keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our
Lord Jesus Christ to eternal life.
22 And some, indeed, reprove when they contend;
23 but others save, snatching them out of the fire; and on others have
compassion in a spirit of fear, hating even the garment that is spotted
by the flesh.
24 But to him that is able to keep you without falling, and to set you
in the presence of his glory blameless in exceeding joy;
25 to the only God our Saviour, through Jesus Christ our Lord, be
glory, majesty, might and authority before every age, both now and
throughout all the ages: amen.436
Codex Sinaiticus:
Revelation of Jesus Christ
Revelation 1
1 The revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him, to show to
his servants things that must shortly take place, and having sent by
his angel he made it known to his servant John,
2 who became a witness to the word of God and the testimony of
Jesus Christ, whatever things he saw.
3 Blessed is he that reads and they that hear the words of the
prophecy, and that keep the things that are written in it; for the time
is at hand.
4 John to the seven churches that are in Asia: grace to you and peace
from him who is, and who was, and who comes, and from the seven
spirits that are before his throne,
5 and from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, the first-born of
the dead and the prince of the kings of the earth. To him that loves us
and that washed us from our sins in his blood,
6 and made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father, to him be
glory and strength through the ages: amen.
7 Behold, he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they
also that pierced him, and all the tribes of the land shall wail because
of him. Yes, amen.
8 I am the Alpha and the Omega, says the Lord God, who is, and who
was, and who comes, the Almighty.
9 I John, your brother and companion in the affliction and kingdom
and patience in Jesus, was in the island that is called Patmos because
of the word of God and the testimony of Jesus.
10 I was in-spirit on the Lord’s day and heard behind me a voice
great as that of a trumpet,
11 saying: What thou seest write in a book, and send to the seven
churches, to Ephesus, and to Smyrna, and to Pergamus, and to
Thyatira, and to Sardis, and to Philadelphia, and to Laodicea.
12 And I turned to see the voice that talked with me; and having
turned, I saw seven golden candlesticks,
13 and in the midst of the candlesticks one like the Son of man,
clothed in a robe reaching to the feet, and girded about the breasts
with a golden girdle;
14 but his head and his hair were white as white wool, like snow, and
his eyes were as a flame of fire,
15 and his feet were like burnished brass, as if they burned in a
furnace, and his voice as the sound of many waters;
16 and he had in his right hand seven stars, and out of his mouth
went forth a sword two-edged, sharp, and his face as the sun when it
shines in its strength.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
437
17 And when I had seen him, I fell at his feet as dead; and he laid his
right hand upon me, saying: Fear not: I am the First and the Last,
18 and that lives, and I was dead, and behold, I am living from age to
age, and have the keys of death and of hades.
19 Write therefore the things that thou sawest, and the things that
are, and those that shall be after these,
20 the mystery of the seven stars that thou sawest in my right hand,
and the seven golden candlesticks. The seven stars and angels of the
seven churches, and the seven candlesticks are seven churches.
Revelation 2
1 To the angel of the church in Ephesus write: These things says he
that holds the seven stars in his right hand, that walks in the midst of
the seven golden candlesticks;
2 I know thy works, and thy labor, and thy patience, and that thou
canst not endure evil men, and hast tried those that say that they are
apostles and are not, and hast found them liars;
3 and thou hast patience, and hast endured because of my name, and
hast not fainted.
4 But I have against thee that thou hast left thy first love.
5 Remember therefore whence thou hast fallen, and repent and do
the first works: else, I am coming to thee, and will move thy
candlestick out of its place, unless thou repent.
6 But this thou hast, that thou hatest the works of the Nicolaitans,
which I also hate.
7 He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the
churches: To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the tree of life,
which is in the paradise of my God.
8 And to the angel of the church in Smyrna write: These things says
the First and the Last, who was dead and revived;
9 I know thy affliction and thy poverty, (but thou art rich) and the
blasphemy of those that say that they are Jews and are not, but are a
synagogue of Satan.
10 Fear in no way the things that thou art about to suffer. Behold
now, the devil is about to cast some of you into prison that you may
be tried, and you shall have affliction ten days. Be thou faithful to
death, and I will give thee the crown of life.
11 He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the
churches: He that overcomes shall not be hurt by the second death.
12 And to the angel of the church in Pergamus write: These things
says he that has the sword two-edged, sharp;
13 I know where thou dwellest, where the throne of Satan is; and yet
thou boldest fast my name, and didst not deny my faith, even in the438
Codex Sinaiticus:
days in which Antipas was my faithful witness, who was slain among
you, where Satan dwells.
14 But I have against thee a few things: thou hast there those that
hold the teaching of Balaam, who taught Balak to put a stumbling-
block before the sons of Israel and to cause them to eat idol-sacrifices
and to commit lewdness.
15 So hast thou also in like manner those that hold the teaching of
the Nicolaitans.
6 Repent therefore; otherwise I am coming to thee quickly, and I will
war against them with the sword of my mouth.
17 He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the
churches: To him that overcomes I will give of the hidden manna;
and I will give him a white stone, and on the stone a new name
written, which no one knows but he that receives it.
18 And to the angel of the church in Thyatira write: These things says
the Son of God, who has his eyes as a flame of fire, and his feet like
burnished brass:
19 I know thy works and thy love and thy faith and thy service and
thy patience, and thy works the last more than the first.
20 But I have against thee that thou sufferest thy wife Jezebel, who
says that she is a prophetess, and teaches and leads my servants
astray to commit lewdness and to eat idol-sacrifices.
21 And I gave her time to repent, and she will not repent of her
lewdness.
22 Behold, I cast her into a bed, and those that commit adultery with
her into great affliction, unless they repent of her works.
23 And her children will I kill with death; and all the churches shall
know that I am he that searches the reins and the hearts; and I will
give to you, to each one, according to your works.
24 But to you I say, to the rest that are in Thyatira, as many as have
not this teaching, such as have not known the depths of Satan, as
they say, I lay upon you no other burden;
25 but what you have hold fast till I come.
26 And he that overcomes and that keeps my works to the end, to
him will I give authority over the nations,
27 and he shall rule them with a rod of iron, as the vessels of a potter
shall they be broken to pieces, as I have received from my Father,
28 and I will give him the morning star.
29 He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the
churches.
Revelation 3The H. T. Anderson New Testament
439
1 And to the angel of the church in Sardis write: These things says he
that has the seven spirits of God and the seven stars: I know thy
works, that thou hast a name that thou livest, and art dead.
2 Become wakeful, and strengthen the things that remain that are
about to die. For I have not found thy works fulfilled before my God.
3 Remember therefore how thou hast received and heard, and watch
and repent. If therefore thou wilt not be wakeful, I will come as a
thief, and thou shalt not know at what hour I will come upon thee.
4 But thou hast a few names in Sardis who have not defiled their
garments, and they shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy.
5 He that overcomes, he shall be clothed in white raiment, and I will
not blot his name out of the book of life, and I will confess his name
before my Father and before his angels.
6 He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the
churches.
7 And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia write: These things
says he that is holy, he that is true, he that has the key of David, he
that opens and no one shall shut, and shuts and no one shall open;
8 I know thy works; behold, I have placed before thee an open door,
that no one can shut; because thou hast a little strength, and hast
kept my word and hast not denied my name.
9 Behold, I will give to them of the synagogue of Satan, that say that
they are Jews, and are not, but do lie: behold, I will make them come
and worship before thy feet, and they shall know that I have loved
thee.
10 Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I also will keep
thee from the hour of temptation that shall come on all the world, to
try them that dwell on the earth.
11 I come quickly: hold fast that which thou hast, that no one take thy
crown.
12 He that overcomes, I will make him a pillar in the temple of my
God, and he shall go out no more, and I will write upon him the
name of my God and the name of the city of my God, the new
Jerusalem that comes down out of heaven from my God, and my new
name.
13 He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the
churches.
14 And to the angel of the church in Laodicea write: These things says
the Amen, the witness that is faithful and true, the beginning of the
creation of God;
15 1 know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot. I would that
thou wert either cold or hot.
16 So because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will
vomit thee out of my mouth.440
Codex Sinaiticus:
17 Because thou sayest: I am rich and have abundance and have need
of nothing, and knowest not that thou art wretched and pitiable and
poor and blind and naked,
18 I counsel thee to buy of me gold purified in fire, that thou mayest
be rich, and white raiment, that thou mayest be clothed, and the
shame of thy nakedness may not be made manifest, and to anoint thy
eyes with eyesalve, that thou mayest see.
19 As many as I love I rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore, and
repent.
20 Behold, I stand at the door and knock: if any one hear my voice
and open the door, I will come in to him and will sup with him and
he with me.
21 He that overcomes, I will give to him to sit with me in my throne,
as I also overcame and sat down with my Father in his throne.
22 He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the
churches.
Revelation 4
1 After these things I saw, and behold, a door opened in heaven, and
the voice, the first that I heard, was as that of a trumpet talking with
me, saying: Come up hither, and I will show thee things that must
take place after these.
2 Immediately I was in spirit; and behold, a throne was set in heaven
and upon the throne was one sitting,
3 and he that sat was like in appearance to a jasper and a sardine
stone, and a rainbow round about the throne, like in appearance to
an emerald.
4 And round about the throne were twenty-four thrones; and upon
the twenty-four thrones I saw elders sitting, clothed in white raiment,
and on their head golden crowns.
5 And out of the throne go forth lightnings and voices and thunders;
and there were seven lamps of fire burning before the throne, which
are the seven spirits of God;
6 and before the throne was as a sea of glass like crystal; and in the
midst of the throne and round about the throne four living creatures
full of eyes before and behind.
7 And the first living creature was like a lion, and the second living
creature was like a calf, and the third living creature had the face as
of a man, and the fourth living creature was like a flying eagle.
8 And the four living creatures, each of them having six wings, are
full of eyes round about and within, and have no rest day and night,
saying: Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God, the Almighty, who was, and
who is, and who comes.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
441
9 And whenever the living creatures give glory and honor and thanks
to him that sits upon the throne, who lives from age to age,
10 the twenty-four elders fall before him that sits upon the throne,
and worship him that live, from age to age, and throw their crowns
before the throne, saying:
11 Worthy art thou, our Lord and God, to receive glory and honor and
power, for thou didst create all things, and because of thy will they
existed and were created.
Revelation 5
1 And I saw in the right hand of him that sat on the throne a book
written within and on the back, sealed with seven seals.
2 And I saw a strong angel proclaiming with a loud voice: Who is
worthy to open the book and break its seals?
3 And no one in heaven, neither on the earth nor under the earth,
was able to open the book nor to look upon it.
4 And I wept much, because no one was found worthy to open the
book nor to look upon it.
5 And one of the elders said to me: Weep not; behold, he has
prevailed who is the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of David, that
opens the book and its seven seals.
6 And I saw in the midst of the throne and of the four living
creatures, and in the midst of the elders, a Lamb standing as if it had
been slain, having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the. seven
spirits of God sent forth into all the earth.
7 And he came and took it out of the right hand of him that sat upon
the throne.
8 And when he had taken the book, the four living creatures and the
twenty-four elders fell down before the lamb, having each one a harp
and golden vials full of incense, which are the prayers of the saints.
9 And they sing a new song, saying: Worthy art thou to take the book,
and to open its seals, because thou wast slain and didst redeem to
God in thy blood out of every tribe and tongue and people and
nation,
10 and didst make them a kingdom and priests, and they shall reign
on the earth.
11 And I saw, and I heard the voice of many angels round about the
throne and the living creatures and the elders, and the number of
them was myriads of myriads and thousands of thousands.
12 saying with a loud voice: Worthy is the Lamb that was slam to
receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and
glory, and blessing.
13 And every created thing that is in heaven, and those that are on
the earth, and under the earth, and in the sea, even those in them, all442
Codex Sinaiticus:
did I hear saying: To him that sits on the throne and to the Lamb be
blessing, and honor, and glory, and might, from age to age.
14 And the four living creatures heard I saying: Amen; and the elders
fell down and worshipped.
Revelation 6
1 And I saw when the Lamb had opened one of the seven seals, and I
heard one of the four living creatures saying as with a voice of
thunder: Come.
2 And I saw, and behold, a white horse, and he that sat upon him had
a bow, and to him was given a crown, and he went forth conquering
and to conquer.
3 And when he had opened the second seal. I heard the second living
creature saying: Come.
4 And there went forth another horse that was red; and to him that
sat on him was given to take peace from the earth, and that they
should slay one another: and there was given to him a great sword.
5 And when he had opened the third seal, I heard the third living
creature saying: Come. And I saw, and behold, a black horse, and he
that sat on him had a balance in his hand.
6 And I heard a voice in the midst of the four living creatures, saying:
A choenix of wheat for a denarius, and three choenices of barley for a
denarius: and see that thou hurt not the oil and the wine.
7 And when he had opened the fourth seal, I heard the fourth living
creature saying: Come.
8 And I saw, and behold, a pale horse, and he that sat on him, his
name was death, and hades followed with him; and there was given
to them authority over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with the
sword and with famine and with death and by the wild beasts of the
earth.
9 And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the
souls of those that had been slain because of the word of God and
because of the testimony that they held.
10 And they cried with a loud voice, saying: How long, O Sovereign
holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that
dwell on the earth?
11 And there was given to them a white robe, and it was said to them
that they should rest yet a while, till the number of their fellow
servants and their brethren that should be killed as they had been
should be fulfilled.
12 And I saw when he had opened the sixth seal, and there was a
great earthquake, and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and
the whole of the moon became as blood,The H. T. Anderson New Testament
443
13 and the stars of heaven fell to the earth, as a fig tree casting her
untimely figs when shaken by a mighty wind,
14 and the heaven departed as a scroll rolled together, and every
mountain and island were moved out of their places.
15 And the kings of the earth and the great men and the officers and
the rich and the mighty and every servant and free man hid
themselves in the caves and in the rocks of the mountains,
16 and said to the mountains and rocks: Fall upon us and conceal us
from the face of him that sits on the throne and from the wrath of the
Lamb.
17 for the great day of his wrath has come, and who is able to stand?
Revelation 7
1 And after this I saw four angels standing on the four corners of the
earth, holding the four winds of the earth, that the wind should not
blow on the earth nor on the sea nor on any tree.
2 And I saw another angel ascending from the rising of the sun,
having the seal of the living God; and he cried with a loud voice to the
four angels to whom it was given to hurt the earth and the sea,
3 saying: Hurt not the earth nor the sea nor the trees, till we shall
have sealed the servants of our God on their foreheads.
4 And I heard the number of those that were sealed; a hundred and
forty-four thousand were sealed of every tribe of the sons of Israel:
5 of the tribe of Judah twelve thousand were sealed; of the tribe of
Reuben twelve thousand: of the tribe of Gad twelve thousand:
6 of the tribe of Asher twelve thousand; of the tribe of Naphtali
twelve thousand; of the tribe of Manasseh twelve thousand;
7 of the tribe of Simeon twelve thousand; of the tribe of Levi twelve
thousand; of the tribe of Issachar twelve thousand;
8 of the tribe of Zebulon twelve thousand; of the tribe of Joseph
twelve thousand; of the tribe of Benjamin twelve thousand were
sealed.
9 After these things I saw, and behold, a great multitude, which no
one could number, out of every nation and the tribes and peoples and
tongues, standing before the throne and before the Lamb, clothed
with white robes, and palms in their hands;
10 and they cry with a loud voice, saying: Salvation to our God who
sits on the throne, and to the Lamb.
11 And all the angels stood round about the throne and the elders and
the living creatures, and fell before the throne on their faces and
worshipped God,
12 saying: Amen, blessing and glory and wisdom and thanks and
honor and power and strength to our God from age to age.444
Codex Sinaiticus:
13 And one of the elders answered, saying to me: These “that are
clothed in white robes, who are they and whence came they?
14 And I said to him: My lord, thou knowest. And he said to me:
These are they that come out of great affliction, and they washed
their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.
15 Therefore are they before the throne of God, and they serve him
day and night in his temple, and he that sits on the throne shall dwell
among them.
16 They shall hunger no more, neither shall they thirst any more,
neither shall the sun fall upon them, nor any heat,
17 for the Lamb that is in the midst of the throne shall feed them, and
lead them to living fountains of waters, and God shall wipe away
every tear from their eyes.
Revelation 8
1 And when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in
heaven for about half an hour.
2 And I saw the seven angels that stand before God, and to them
were given seven trumpets.
3 And another angel came and stood by the altar, having a golden
censer; and there was given to him much incense, that he should
offer it with the prayers of all the saints on the golden altar that is
before the throne.
4 And the smoke of the incense ascended with the prayers of the
saints out of the hand of the angel before God.
5 And the angel took the censer, and filled it from the fire of the altar
and threw it into the earth; and there were thunders, and lightnings,
and voices, and an earthquake.
6 And the seven angels that had the seven trumpets prepared
themselves to sound.
7 And the first sounded; and there was hail and fire mingled with
blood, and it was thrown into the earth; and the third part of the
earth was burned up, and the third part of the trees was burned up,
and all green grass was burned up.
8 And the second angel sounded; and as it were a great mountain
burning with fire was cast into the sea; and the third part of the sea
became blood,
9 and the third part of the creatures that were in the sea, that had
life, died, and the third part of the ships were destroyed.
10 And the third angel sounded; and there fell from heaven a great
star burning as a lamp, and it fell upon the third part of the rivers
and upon the fountains of waters.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
445
11 And the name of the star is called Wormwood. And the third part
of the waters became wormwood, and many men died of the waters,
because they were made bitter.
12 And the fourth angel sounded; and the third part of the sun was
smitten, and the third part of the moon, and the third part of the
stars, that the third part of them might be darkened, and the day
might not shine for the third part of it, and the night likewise.
13 And I saw, and heard an eagle flying in the midst of heaven, saying
with a loud voice: Woe, woe, woe to them that dwell on the earth
because of the rest of the voices of the trumpet of the three angels
that are about to sound.
Revelation 9
1 And the fifth angel sounded: and I saw a star that had fallen from
heaven to the earth, and to him was given the key of the pit of the
abyss.
2 And he opened the pit of the abyss; and there arose out of the pit a
smoke as the smoke of a great furnace, and the sun and the air were
darkened by means of the smoke of the pit.
3 And out of the smoke came forth locusts upon the earth, and to
them was given power as the scorpions of the earth have power.
4 And it was said to them that they should not hurt the grass of the
earth, neither any green thing nor any tree, but the men such as have
not the seal of God in their foreheads.
5 And it was given to them that they should not kill them, but that
they should be tormented five months; and this torment is as the
torment of a scorpion, when he strikes a man.
6 And in those days men shall seek death and shall not find it, and
they shall desire to die and death flees from them.
7 And the shape of the locusts was like horses prepared for battle,
and on their heads as crowns like gold, and; their faces as the faces of
men.
8 and they had hair as the hair of women, and their teeth were as the
teeth of lions,
9 and they had breastplates as breastplates of iron, and the sound of
their wings as the sound of chariots of many horses running to battle.
10 And they have tails like scorpions, and stings, and in their tails is
their power to hurt men five months:
11 they have a king over them, the angel of the abyss, his name in
Hebrew is Abaddon, but in Greek he has the name Apollyon.
12 The first woe has past: behold, there come two woes more after
this.
13 And the sixth angel sounded; and I heard a voice from the four
horns of the golden altar that is before God,446
Codex Sinaiticus:
14 saying to the sixth angel, that had the trumpet: Loose the four
angels that are bound on the great river Euphrates.
15 And the four angels were loosed, who were prepared for an hour
and a day and a month and a year, to slay the third part of men.
16 And the number of the armies of horsemen was two myriads of
myriads: I heard the number of them.
17 And thus I saw the horses in the vision, and those that sat on
them, having breastplates fiery, hyacinthine, and of sulphur; and the
heads of the horses as the heads of lions, and out of their mouths go
forth fire and smoke and brimstone.
18 By these three plagues was the third part of men killed, by the fire,
and the smoke, and the brimstone that went forth out of their
mouths.
19 For the power of the horses is in their mouth and in their tails; for
their tails are like serpents, and have heads, and with them they do
hurt.
20 And the rest of men, that were not killed by these plagues,
repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not
worship demons and idols of gold and of silver and of brass and of
stone and of wood, which can neither see, nor hear, nor walk,
21 and they repented not of their murders, neither of their sorceries
nor of their lewdness nor of their thefts.
Revelation 10
1 And I saw another angel that was mighty descending from heaven,
clothed with a cloud, and a rainbow was upon his head, and his face
was as the sun, and his feet as pillars of fire;
2 and he had in his hand a little book opened. And he put his right
foot on the sea, but his left on the land,
3 and he cried with a loud voice as a lion roars. And when he had
cried, the seven thunders uttered their voices.
4 And when the seven thunders had spoken, I was about to write;
and I heard a voice from heaven, saying: Seal up the things that the
seven thunders spoke, and write them not.
5 And the angel that I saw standing on the sea and on the earth, lifted
up his right hand to heaven.
6 and swore by him that lives from age to age, who created the
heaven and the things that are in it, and the earth and the things that
are in it, and the sea and the things that are in it, that time should no
longer be,
7 but in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he shall
sound, and the mystery of God was finished, as he proclaimed to his
servants the prophets.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
447
8 And the voice that I heard from heaven again spoke to me and said:
Go, take the little book that is opened in the hand of the angel that
stands on the sea and on the earth.
9 And I went to the angel, saying to him that he should give me the
little book. And he said to me: Take it and eat it up, and it will make
thy belly bitter, but in thy mouth it shall be sweet as honey.
10 And I took the little book out of the hand of the angel and ate it
up; and it was in my mouth as honey, sweet; and when I had eaten it,
my belly was bitter.
11 And they say to me: Thou must again prophesy against many
peoples and nations and tongues and kings.
Revelation 11
1 And there was given me a reed like a rod, saying: Arise and measure
the temple of God and the altar and those that worship in it.
2 And the court that is without the temple leave out and measure it
not, for it is given to the Gentiles, and the holy city shall they tread
down forty-two months.
3 And I will give to my two witnesses, and they shall prophesy a
thousand two hundred and sixty days, clothed in sackcloth.
4 These are the two olive-trees and the two candlesticks that stand
before the Lord of the earth.
5 And if any one will hurt them, fire comes forth from their mouth
and devours their enemies; and if any one will hurt them, they must
be put to death.
6 These have authority to shut heaven, that rain fall not in the days of
their prophecy, and they have authority over the waters to turn them
into blood, and to smite the earth with every plague as often as they
will.
7 And when they shall have accomplished their testimony, the beast
that ascends out of the abyss shall make war with them and
overcome them and kill them.
8 And their dead bodies* in the street of the great city, which is
called, spiritually, Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord also was
crucified.
*No verb in Greek: perhaps “suspended” is best…
9 And they of the peoples and tribes and tongues and nations see
their dead bodies three days and a half, and suffer not their dead
bodies to be put into a tomb.
10 And they that dwell on the earth rejoice over them and make
merry, and shall send gifts one to another, because these two
prophets tormented them that dwell on the earth.448
Codex Sinaiticus:
11 And after three days and a half the spirit of life from God entered
into them, and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon
those that saw them.
12 And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying to them: Come up
hither; and they went up into heaven in a cloud, and their enemies
beheld them.
13 And in that hour there was a great earthquake, and the tenth part
of the city fell, and there were killed in the earthquake names of men
seven thousand, and the rest were frightened and gave glory to the
God of heaven.
14 The second woe was passed: the third woe, behold, it comes
quickly.
15 And the seventh angel sounded; and there were great voices in
heaven, saying: The kingdom of the world has become our Lord’s and
his Christ’s, and he shall reign from age to age.
16 And the twenty-four elders that sat on their thrones before God
fell on their faces and worshipped God,
17 saying: We give thee thanks. Lord God, the Almighty who art and
who wast, because thou hast taken thy great power and hast reigned;
18 and the nations were angry, and thy wrath has come, and the time
of the dead that they should be judged, and that thou shouldst give
reward to thy servants the prophets and to thy saints and to those
that fear thy name, both small and great, and that thou shouldst
destroy those that destroy the earth.
19 And the temple of God was opened in heaven, and there appeared
in his temple the ark of his covenant, and there were lightnings, and
voices, and thunderings, and an earthquake, and great hail.
Revelation 12
1 And a great sign appeared in heaven, a woman clothed with the
sun, and the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve
stars;
2 and being with child she cried, being in travail and in pain to be
delivered.
3 And there appeared another sign in heaven, and behold, a great red
dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and on his head seven
diadems,
4 and his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and cast
them to the earth. And the dragon stood before the woman that was
about to be delivered, that when she brought forth her child he might
devour it.
5 And she brought forth a man-child, who was about to rule all
nations with a rod of iron; and her child was caught away to God and
to his throne.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
449
6 And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place
prepared of God, that they should feed her there a thousand two
hundred and sixty days.
7 And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels went forth to
war with the dragon. And the dragon fought and his angels,
8 and prevailed not, neither was their place found any more in
heaven.
9 And the great dragon was cast out, the old serpent, that is called
devil and Satan, that deceives the whole world; he was cast out into
the earth, and his angels were cast out with him.
10 And I heard a great voice in heaven, saying: Now has come the
salvation, and the power, and the kingdom of our God, and the
authority of his Christ, for the accuser of our brethren has been cast
out, he that accused them before our God day and night.
11 And they overcame him because of the blood of the Lamb and
because of the word of their testimony, and they loved not their lives
to their death.
12 Therefore rejoice, you heavens and those that dwell in them: alas
for the earth and the sea, for the devil has come down to you having
great wrath, knowing that he has a short time.
13 And when the dragon saw that he was cast out into the earth, he
persecuted the woman who had brought forth the man-child.
14 And there were given to the woman two wings of a great eagle,
that she might fly into the wilderness to her place, where she is
nourished for a time and times and half a time from the face of the
serpent.
15 And the serpent cast out of his mouth after the woman water as a
river, that he might carry her away with a flood.
16 And the earth helped the woman; and the earth opened her
mouth, and swallowed up the river that the dragon threw out of his
mouth.
17 And the dragon was angry with the woman, and went away to
make war with the rest of her children, that keep the commandments
of God, and that hold the testimony of Jesus.
Revelation 13
1 And I stood on the sand of the sea, and saw a beast coming up out
of the sea, and he had seven heads and ten horns, and on his horns
ten diadems, and on his heads names impiously irreverent.
2 And the beast that I saw was like a leopard, and his feet were as
those of a bear, and his mouth was as the mouth of a lion. And the
dragon gave him his power, and his throne, and great authority.450
Codex Sinaiticus:
3 And I saw one of his heads as if it had been wounded even to death;
and his deadly wound was healed; and all the earth wondered after
the beast.
4 And they worshipped the dragon, because he gave authority to the
beast; and they worshipped the beast, saying, Who is like the beast?
and, Who is able to make war with him?
5 And there was given him a mouth that spoke great things and
impious words; and authority was given to him to continue forty-two
months.
6 And he opened his mouth in impious speeches against God, to utter
impious words against his name, and his tabernacle, and against
those who dwell in heaven.
7 And it was given him to make war with the saints, and to overcome
them; and authority was given him over every tribe and people and
tongue and nation.
8 And all that dwell upon the earth will worship him, those whose
names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb that was slain
from the foundation of the world.
9 If any one has an ear, let him hear.
10 If any one leads into captivity, he shall go into captivity. If any
kills with the sword, he must be killed with the sword. Here is the
patience and faithfulness of the saints.
11 And I saw another beast coming up out of the earth; and he had
two horns like a lamb, and he spoke as a dragon.
12 And he exercises all the authority of the first beast in his presence;
and he causes the earth and those who dwell in it to worship the first
beast, whose deadly wound was healed.
13 And he does great signs, and even causes fire to descend from
heaven upon the earth in the sight of men.
14 And he deceives those who dwell on the earth, by means of the
signs which he is allowed to do in the presence of the beast, saying to
those who dwell on the earth, that they should make an image for the
beast which had the wound by the sword, and did live.
15 And it was granted him to give spirit to the image of the beast, that
the image of the beast should both speak, and cause as many as
would not worship the image of the beast, to be killed.
16 And he causes all, small and great, rich and poor, free and bond,
to receive a mark on their right hand, or on their forehead,
17 and that no one should be able to buy or sell, but he that had the
mark, the name of the beast, or the number of his name.
18 Here is wisdom. Let him that has understanding, count the
number of the beast; for it is the number of a man, and his number is
six hundred and sixty-six.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
451
Revelation 14
1 And I saw, and behold, the Lamb stood on the mount Zion, and
with him a hundred and forty-four thousand, that had his name and
his Father’s name written in their foreheads.
2 And I heard a voice from heaven like the voice of many waters, and
like the voice of loud thunder; and I heard the voice of harpers
harping with their harps.
3 And they sung a new song before the throne, and before the four
living creatures, and the elders; and no one was able to learn the
song, but the hundred and forty-four thousand that had been
redeemed from the earth.
4 These are they that were not defiled with women; for they are
virgins; these are they that follow the Lamb wherever he goes; these
were redeemed from among men, the first-fruits to God and to the
Lamb.
5 And in their mouth was found no guile; for they are blameless.
6 And I saw another angel flying in mid-heaven, having the eternal
gospel to preach to those who dwell on the earth, even to every
nation and tribe and tongue and people;
7 and he said with a loud voice: Fear God, and give glory to him for
the hour of his judgment has come; and worship him that made the
heaven, and the earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters.
8 And another angel followed, saying: Babylon the great has fallen,
has fallen: because she has made all nations drink of the maddening
wine of her lewdness.
9 And the third angel followed them, saying, with a loud voice: If any
one worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his
forehead, or on his hand, even he shall drink of the wine of the wrath
of God, which is prepared without mixture in the cup of his
indignation;
10 and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence
of the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb;
11 and the smoke of their torment ascends from age to age; and they
who worship the beast and his image, and whoever receives the mark
of his name, have no rest day or night.
12 Here is the patience of the saints, who keep the commandments of
God and the faith of Jesus.
13 And I heard a voice from heaven, saying: Write, Blessed are the
dead that die in the Lord from this time. Yes, says the Spirit, that
they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.
14 And I saw, and behold, a white cloud, and on the cloud sat one like
the Son of man, who had on his head a crown of gold, and in his hand
a sharp sickle.452
Codex Sinaiticus:
15 And another angel came out of the temple, and cried with a loud
voice to him that sat on the cloud: Thrust in your sickle and reap, for
the time has come for you to reap; for the harvest of the earth is fully
ripe.
16 And he that sat on the cloud thrust in his sickle on the earth, and
the earth was reaped.
17 And another angel came out of the temple that is in heaven, and
he also had a sharp sickle.
18 And another angel that had power over fire, came out from the
altar; and he cried with a loud cry to him that had the sharp sickle,
and said: Thrust in your sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the
vine of the earth, for its grapes are fully ripe.
19 And the angel thrust in his sickle on the earth, and gathered the
vine of the earth, and threw it into the great winepress of the wrath of
God.
20 And the winepress was trodden without the city; and blood came
out of the winepress, even to the bridles of the horses, to the distance
of a thousand and six hundred furlongs.
Revelation 15
1 And I saw another sign in heaven, great and wonderful: seven
angels that had seven plagues which are the last; for by them the
wrath of God is brought to an end.
2 And I saw, as it were, a sea of glass mingled with fire, and those
who had obtained the victory over the beast, and over his image, and
over the number of his name, standing on the sea of glass, having the
harps of God.
3 And they sung the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song
of the Lamb, saying: Great and wonderful are thy works, Lord God
Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints.
4 Who will not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? For thou
alone art holy; for all nations shall come and worship before thee,
because thy judgments are made manifest.
5 And after this I saw, and the temple of the tabernacle of the
testimony in heaven was opened;
6 and the seven angels that had the seven plagues came out of the
temple, clothed in pure white linen, and girded about the breasts
with golden girdles.
7 And one of the four living creatures gave to the seven angels seven
golden cups full of the wrath of God, who lives from age to age.
8 And the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God, and
from his power; and no one was able to enter the temple, till the
seven plagues of the seven angels were completed.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
453
Revelation 16
1 And I heard a great voice out of the temple, saying to the seven
angels: Go and pour out the seven cups of the wrath of God upon the
earth.
2 And the first angel went, and poured out his cup on the land; and
there came a hurtful and afflictive sore upon the men that had the
mark of the beast, and that worshiped his image.
3 And the second angel poured out his cup on the sea; and it became
blood, like that of a dead man; and every soul in the sea died.
4 And the third angel poured out his cup on the rivers and the
fountains of waters; and they became blood.
5 And I heard the angel of the waters, saying: Just art thou, who art
and who wast, the Holy One, because thou hast thus judged.
6 For they have shed the blood of saints and of prophets, and thou
hast given them blood to drink, and they are worthy.
7 And I heard a voice from the altar saying: Even so, Lord God
Almighty, true and just are thy judgments.
8 And the fourth angel poured out his cup on the sun; and it was
given to him to scorch men with fire.
9 And men were scorched with great heat; and they uttered impious
words against the name of God who has power over these plagues;
and they repented not, that they might give him glory.
10 And the fifth angel poured out his cup on the throne of the beast;
and his kingdom was filled with darkness; and they gnawed their
tongues because of pain;
11 and they spoke impiously against the God of heaven because of
their pains, and because of their sores; and they repented not of their
works.
12 And the sixth angel poured out his cup on the great river
Euphrates; and its water was dried up, that the way of the kings of
the east might be prepared.
13 And I saw three unclean spirits, like frogs, come out of the mouth
of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast; and out of the
mouth of the false prophet.
14 For they are the spirits of demons that do signs, and they go forth
to the kings of the whole world, to bring them together to the battle
of that great day of God Almighty.
15 Behold, I come as a thief: blessed is he that watches, and keeps his
garments, that he may not walk naked, and that men may not see his
nakedness.
16 And they brought them together into a place that is called, in the
Hebrew tongue, Armageddon.454
Codex Sinaiticus:
17 And the seventh angel poured out his cup into the air; and there
came a great voice from the temple of heaven, from the throne,
saying: It is done.
18 And there were lightnings, and voices, and thunders; and there
was a great earthquake, such as has not been since men were on the
earth, so great an earthquake, and so mighty.
19 And the great city was divided into three parts, and the cities of
the nations fell; and Babylon the great was remembered before God,
that he might give her the cup of the wine of his fiercest wrath.
20 And every island fled, and the mountains were not found.
21 And great hail, every stone about the weight of a talent, fell from
heaven upon men; and men spoke impiously against God, because of
the plague of the hail; for the plague of it was very great.
Revelation 17
1 And there came one of the seven angels that had the seven cups,
and talked with me, saying: Come, I will show you the judgment of
the great harlot that sits on many waters,
2 with whom the kings of the earth have practiced lewdness, and with
the wine of whose lewdness the inhabitants of the earth have been
made drunk.
3 And he carried me, away in spirit into the wilderness; and I saw a
woman sitting on a scarlet beast, that was full of impious names, and
that had seven heads and ten horns.
4 And the woman was clothed in purple and scarlet, and adorned
with gold, and precious stones, and pearls; and she had in her hand a
golden cup full of idolatrous pollutions, and the impurities of her
lewdness.
5 And on her forehead was a name written: MYSTERY, BABYLON
THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS, AND OF THE
IDOLATROUS POLLUTIONS OF THE EARTH.
6 And I saw the woman drunk with the blood of the saints, and with
the blood of the witnesses of Jesus; and when I saw her, I wondered
with great astonishment.
7 And the angel said to me: Why did you wonder? I will tell you the
mystery of the woman, and of the beast that carries her, that had
seven heads and ten horns.
8 The beast that you saw, was, and is not, and will come out of the
abyss, and go to perdition; and those who dwell on the earth, whose
names were not written in the book of life from the foundation of the
world, will wonder, when they see the beast that was, and is not,
though he is yet present.
9 Here is the mind that has wisdom: The seven heads are seven
mountains, on which the woman sits.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
455
10 And there are seven kings: five have fallen, one is, and the other
has not yet come; and when he comes, he must remain but a little
while.
11 And the beast that was, and is not, even he is the eighth, and is of
the seven, and goes to perdition.
12 And the ten horns which you saw are ten kings, who have received
no kingdom as yet, but receive authority as kings at the same time
with the beast.
13 These have one mind, and will give their power and authority to
the beast.
14 These will make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb will overcome
them, for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings; and those with him
are called, and chosen, and faithful.
15 And he said to me: The waters which you saw, where the harlot
sits, are peoples and multitudes and nations and tongues.
16 And the ten horns that you saw, and the beast, these will hate the
harlot, and will make her desolate and naked, and will eat her flesh,
and burn her up with fire.
17 For God has put into their hearts to fulfill his will, and to agree,
and to give their kingdom to the beast, till the words of God be
accomplished.
18 And the woman that you saw is that great city, which reigns over
the kings of the earth.
Revelation 18
1 And after these things I saw another angel come down from heaven,
having great power; and the earth was lighted with his glory.
2 And he cried with a strong voice, saying: Babylon the great has
fallen, has fallen, and has become the habitation of demons, and the
haunt of every unclean spirit, and the resort of every unclean and
hateful bird.
3 For she has made all nations drink of the maddening wine of her
lewdness; and the kings of the earth have practiced lewdness with
her, and the merchants of the earth have become rich by the power of
her voluptuousness.
4 And I heard another voice from heaven, saying: Come out of her,
my people, lest you become partakers of her sins, and lest you receive
of her plagues.
5 For her sins reach even to heaven, and God has remembered her
iniquities.
6 Reward her as she has rewarded you, and render back to her
double, according to her works; in the cup that she has mixed, mix
for her double.456
Codex Sinaiticus:
7 As much glory and voluptuousness as she has given to herself, so
much torment and sorrow give her; for she says in her heart, I sit a
queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow.
8 Therefore, her plagues shall come in one day, death and mourning
and famine; and she shall be utterly burned with fire; for strong is
the Lord God who judges her,
9 And the kings of the earth. who have practiced lewdness and lived
voluptuously with her, shall weep and lament for her, when they see
the smoke of her burning
10 standing far off for fear of her torment, saying: Alas, alas, that
great city of Babylon, that mighty city: for in one hour has your
judgment come.
11 And the merchants of the earth shall weep and lament over her,
because no one buys their merchandise any more;
12 the merchandise of gold and silver and precious stones, and of
pearls, and of fine linen and purple, and of silk and scarlet; and every
kind of thiyine wood, and every kind of vessel of ivory, and every
kind of vessel of most costly wood, and of brass, and of iron, and of
marble;
13 and cinnamon and amomum and incense, and ointment and
frankincense, and wine and oil, and fine flour and wheat, and beasts
and sheep, and horses and chariots, and bodies and souls of men.
14 And the fruits that your soul desired have departed from you: and
all things that are dainty and sumptuous have perished from you and
you shall find them no more at all.
15 Those who traded in these things, who were made rich by her,
shall stand far off for fear of her torment, weeping and mourning and
16 saying: Alas, alas, that great city that was clothed in fine linen and
purple and scarlet, and adorned with gold and precious stones and
pearls! for in one hour, so great riches have been brought to ruin.
17 And every master of a ship, and every one in ships, and sailors,
and as many as trade by sea, stood far off,
18 and cried, when they saw the smoke of her burning, saying: What
city is like the great city?
19 And they threw dust on their heads, and cried, weeping and
mourning and saying: Alas, alas, that great city, by which all that had
ships in the sea became rich by means of costly merchandise for in
one hour she is made desolate.
20 Rejoice over her, O heaven, and you saints and apostles and
prophets; for God has avenged you on her.
21 And a mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and
threw it into the sea, saying: Thus, with violence shall Babylon, that
great city, be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
457
22 And the voice of harpers and musicians, and of pipers and
trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in you; and no artist of any
art whatever, shall he found any more in you; and the sound of the
millstone shall be heard no more in you;
23 and the light of a lamp shall shine no more in you; and the voice
of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard no more in you; for
your merchants were the great men of the earth; for by your sorcery
were all nations deceived.
24 And in her was found the blood of prophets and of saints, and of
all that were slain upon the earth.
Revelation 19
1 After these things, I heard the great voice of a vast multitude in
heaven, saying: Alleluia; Salvation and glory and honor and power to
our God;
2 for true and righteous are his judgments, for he has judged the
great harlot that corrupted the earth with her lewdness; and he has
avenged the blood of his servant at her hand.
3 And again they said: Alleluia; and her smoke rises up from age-to
age.
4 And the twenty-four elders, and the four living creatures, fell down,
and worshiped God that sits upon the throne, saying: Amen, Alleluia.
5 And a voice came out of the throne, saying: Praise our God, all you
his servants, and you that fear him, both small and great.
6 And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the
voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying:
Alleluia; for the Lord God, the Almighty reigns.
7 Let us rejoice and be glad, and give glory to him; for the marriage of
the Lamb has come, and his wife has made herself ready.
8 And to her was given that she should be clothed in fine linen, clean
and white; for the fine linen is the righteousness of the saints.
9 And he said to me: Write, Blessed are they that are called to the
marriage-supper of the Lamb. And he said to me: These are the true
words of God.
10 And I fell at his feet to worship him; and he said to me: See that
you do it not; I am your fellow-servant, and of your brethren that
have the testimony of Jesus; worship God; for the testimony of Jesus
is the spirit of prophecy.
11 And I saw heaven opened, and behold, a white horse, and he that
sat on him was called faithful and true, and in righteousness does he
judge, and make war.
12 His eyes were like a flame of fire, and on his head were many
diadems: and he had a name written which no one knew, but he
himself.458
Codex Sinaiticus:
13 And he was clothed with a garment dipped in blood; and his name
is called The Word of God.
14 And the armies that were in heaven followed him on white horses;
and they were clothed in fine linen, white and clean.
15 And out of his mouth goes a sharp, two-edged sword, that with it
he may smite the nations; and he shall rule them with a rod of iron;
and he treads the winepress of the fiercest wrath of God, the
Almighty.
16 And he has, on his raiment and on his thigh, a name written, King
of kings, and Lord of lords.
17 And I saw an angel standing in the sun; and he cried with a loud
voice, saying to all the birds that fly in mid-heaven: Come, gather
yourselves to the great supper of God,
18 that you may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of officers, and
the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of those who sit
on them. and the flesh of all, both freemen and servants, both small
and great.
19 And I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies,
assembled together to make war with him that sat on the horse, and
with his army.
20 And the beast was taken, and the false prophet that was with him,
who did signs in his presence, with which he deceived those who
received the mark of the beast, and those who worshiped his image.
These two were thrown alive into the lake of fire, which burns with
brimstone.
21 And the rest were slain with the sword of him that sat on the
horse, which sword proceeded out of his mouth: and all the birds
were filled with their flesh.
Revelation 20
1 And I saw angel come down from heaven, having the key of the
abyss, and a great chain in his hand.
2 And he laid hold of the dragon, that old serpent, which is the devil
and Satan, and bound him for a thousand years,
3 and threw him into the abyss, and shut him up, and set a seal upon
him, that he should deceive the nations no more, till the thousand
years should be completed; and after this he must be loosed for a
little while.
4 And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and the power of
judging was given to them; and I saw the souls of those who had been
beheaded for the testimony of Jesus, and for the word of God; and of
those who had not worshiped the beast, nor his image, and had not
received his mark on their forehead, nor on their hand; and they
lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
459
5 [no verse]*
*Editor’s note: Mr. Tischendorf prepared and published, in
1869, the common version of our English New Testament, with foot-
notes showing all instances in which it varies from the three oldest
Greek MSS, the Sinaitic, and Vatican, above mentioned, and the
Alexandrine, a later and less accurate MS. According to his account,
verse 5 is spurious.
6 Blessed and holy is he that has part in this first resurrection; over
such the second death has no power; but they shall be priests of God
and of the Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years.
7 And when the thousand years shall have been completed, Satan
shall be loosed from his prison,
8 and shall go out to deceive the nations that are in the four corners
of the earth, Gog and Magog, to bring them together to battle: the
number of these is as the sand of the sea.
9 And they went up on the breadth of the earth, and encompassed
the camp of the saints, and the beloved city; and fire came down out
of heaven from God, and devoured them.
10 And the devil who deceived them was thrown into the lake of fire
and brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet are; and they
shall be tormented day and night from age to age.
11 And I saw a great white throne, and him that sat upon it, from
whose face the earth and the heaven fled away; and no place was
found for them.
12 And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before the throne; and
the books were opened; and another book was opened, which is the
book of life; and the dead were judged out of the things that were
written in the books, according to their works.
13 And the sea gave up the dead that were in it; and death and hades
have up the dead that were in them; and they were judged, every one
according to his works.
14 And death and hades were cast into the lake of fire: this is the
second death.
15 And if any one was not found written in the book of life, he was
thrown into the lake of fire.
Revelation 21
1 And I saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the former heaven and
the former earth had passed away; and the sea was no more.
2 And I saw the holy city, New Jerusalem, coming down out of
heaven, from God, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.
3 And I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying: Behold, the
tabernacle of God is with men and he will dwell with them; and they
shall he his people, and God himself will be with them, their God.460
Codex Sinaiticus:
4 And he will wipe every tear from their eyes, and there shall be no
more death; neither shall there be any more sorrow, nor crying, nor
pain; for the former things have passed away.
5 And he that sat upon the throne said: Behold, I make all things
new. And he said to me: Write, for these words are true and faithful.
6 And he said to me: It is done; I am the Alpha and the Omega, the
Beginning and the End. To him that thirsts, I will give of the fountain
of the water of life freely.
7 He that overcomes shall inherit these things, and I will be his God,
and he shall be my son.
8 But the fearful, and the unbelieving, and the detestable, and
murderers, and lewd persons, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all
liars, shall have their part in the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death.
9 And there came one of the seven angels that had the seven cups full
of the seven last plagues; and he talked with me, saying: Come hither,
and I will show you the bride, the Lamb’s wife.
10 And he carried me away in spirit to a mountain, great and high,
and showed me the holy city, Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven
from God,
11 having the glory of God: that which gave it light was like a most
costly stone, like jasper-stone, brilliant as crystal.
12 It had a wall, great and high; and it had twelve gates, and at the
gates twelve angels, and names written on them, which are the
names of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel;
13 on the east, three gates; on the north, three gates; on the south,
three gates; and on the west, three gates.
14 And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and on them were
the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.
15 And he that talked with me had a measure, a golden reed, that he
might measure the city, and its gates, and its wall.
16 And the city lies square; and its length is as great as its breadth.
And he measured the city with the reed, twelve thousand furlongs:
the length, and the breadth, and the height of it are equal.
17 And he measured the wall of it, a hundred and forty-four cubits,
the measure of a man, that is, of an angel.
18 And the wall of it was built of jasper; and the city was pure gold,
like clear glass.
19 And the foundations of the wall of the city were adorned with
every costly stone: the first foundation was jasper; the second,
sapphire; the third, chalcedony; the fourth, emerald;
20 the fifth, sardonyx; the sixth, sardius; the seventh, crysolite; the
eighth, beryl; the ninth, topaz; the tenth, chrysoprase; the eleventh,
hyacinth; the twelfth, amethyst.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
461
21 And the twelve gates were twelve pearls; every gate was of one
pearl: and the street of the city was pure gold, like clear glass.
22 And I saw no temple in it; for the Lord God, the Almighty, and the
Lamb, are its temple.
23 And the city had no need of the sun, nor of the moon, to shine in
it; for the glory of God gave it light, and the lamp of it is the Lamb.
24 And the nations shall walk by the light of it; and the kings of the
earth bring their glory and their honor into it.
25 And its gates shall not be shut at all by day; for there shall be no
night there.
26 And they shall bring the glory and honor of the nations into it.
27 And there shall not enter it any thing unclean, or that does what is
detestable or that makes a lie; but those who are written in the
Lamb’s book of life.
Revelation 22
1 And he showed me a river of water of life, clear as crystal, coming
out from the throne of God and of the Lamb.
2 In the midst of the street of the city, and on each side of the river,
was the tree of life, which bore twelve kinds of fruit, and yielded its
fruit every month; and the leaves of the tree were for the healing of
the nations.
3 And there shall be no more curse; and the throne of God and of the
Lamb shall be in it; and his servants shall serve him.
4 And they shall see his face, and his name shall be in their
foreheads.
5 And there shall be no more night; and they have no need of the
lamp, nor of the light of the sun; for the Lord God will give them
light; and they shall reign from age to age.
6 And he said to me: These words are faithful and true; and the Lord
God of the spirits of the prophets has sent his angel to show his
servants the things that must shortly take place.
7 And behold, I come quickly: blessed is he that keeps the words of
the prophecy of this book.
8 And I, John, am he that saw and heard these things. And when I
had heard and seen, I fell down to worship before the feet of the
angel that showed me these things.
9 And he said to me: See that you do it not; I am your fellow servant,
and of your brethren the prophets, and of those who keep the words
of this book: worship God.
10 And he said to me: Seal not the words of the prophecy of this
book; for the time is at hand.462
Codex Sinaiticus:
11 He that is unjust, let him be unjust still; he that is polluted, let him
be polluted still; and he that is righteous, let him be righteous still;
and he that is holy, let him be holy still.
12. Behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me to give to every
one as his work shall be.
13 I am the Alpha and the Omega, the First and the Last, the
Beginning and the End.
14 Blessed are those who do his commandments, that they may have
right to the tree of life, and that they may go through the gates into
the city.
15 Without are dogs and sorcerers and lewd persons and murderers
and idolaters, and every one that loves and makes a lie.
16 I, Jesus, have sent my angel to testify these things to you for the
churches. I am the root and the offspring of David, the bright
morning star.
17 And the Spirit and the bride say. Come; and let him that hears,
say, Come; and let him that is thirsty, come; and let him that is
willing, take the water of life freely.
18 I testify to every one that hears the words of the prophecy of this
book: If any one add to these things. God will add to him the plagues
that are written in this book;
19 and if any one take away from the words of the book of this
prophecy. God will take away his part from the tree of life, and from
the holy city; which things are written in this book.
20 He that testifies these things says: Surely, I come quickly. Amen:
come, Lord Jesus.
21 The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with all the saints.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
463464
Codex Sinaiticus:
The Epistle of Barnabas
Barnabas 1
1 Hail, my sons and daughters, in the name of our Master
Yahshua HaMoshiach, who has loved us in peace.
2 I rejoice exceedingly and beyond measure at your blest and
wonderful spirit, since the ordinances of Elohim are great and
rich towards you who have received the engrafted grace of the
spiritual gift.
3 Wherefore, I congratulate myself the more, hoping to be
saved, because I truly see the Spirit poured out upon you from
the rich Master of love. Your longed-for appearance has so
greatly stricken me with amazement.
4 So being persuaded of this, and knowing in myself that since
I spoke among you Yahweh has helped me much in the way of
righteousness, I am completely compelled to love you beyond
even my own spirit, because great faith and love dwells in you
in the hope of His life.
5 Considering also this, that if I take care to communicate to
you a part of that which I have received, it shall turn to my
reward to have assisted such spirits as you are, I gave diligence
to write unto you in few words, in order that together with
your faith, you might have your knowledge perfect also.
6 For there are three doctrines ordained of Yahweh: the hope
of life, the beginning, and the end.
7 For the Master has made known unto us by the prophets the
things which are past, and the things which are at hand, and
has given us the first-fruits of the knowledge of the things that
are to come. Since, therefore, we see all these things severally
working as he has spoken, we ought the more fully and loftily
to approach to his altar;
8 But I, not as a master, but as one of yourselves, will show to
you a few things, by means of which you may even in this
present rejoice.
Barnabas 2
1 Since the days are evil and the adversary has the authority,
we ought to take heed to ourselves and seek out the ordinances
of Yahweh.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
465
2 For the helpers of our faith are fear and patience, and those
who fight on our side are long-suffering and continence.
3 While these, therefore, remain pure in things relating to
Yahweh, wisdom and understanding, science and knowledge,
rejoice together with them.
4 For Elohim has made known unto us through all the
prophets, that he desires neither sacrifices nor whole burnt
offerings, nor oblations; for he says in a certain place,
5 To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices? says
Yahweh. I am full of the whole burnt offerings of rams; I desire
not the fat of lambs, nor the blood of bulls and goats, nor need
you come to be seen of me. For who has required these things
at your hands? You shall not add thereto to tread my court. If
you bring the fine flour, it is vain; incense is an abomination
unto me; your new moons and Shabbatot I cannot endure;
your fastings and holidays and feasts my spirit hates.
6 So these things he has made of no effect, that the new
ordinance of our Master Yahshua HaMoshiach, being free
from the yoke of necessity, might proffer an offering not made
with hands.
7 Again, he says unto them, Did I command your fathers, when
you came out of the land of Egypt, to offer unto me whole
burnt offerings and sacrifices?
8 Did I not rather command them this? – Let each of you bear
no malice against his neighbor in his heart, and love not a false
oath!
9 We ought to perceive, since we are not void of understanding
the meaning of the goodness of Abba Yahweh, because he tells
us, wishing to seek us who are wandering even as sheep, how
we ought to approach him.
10 So he speaks unto us this way: The sacrifice to Elohim is a
broken heart; a smell of sweet savor to Yahweh is a heart that
glorifies him that made it. Brethren, we ought to examine our
salvation accurately, lest the evil one, making an entrance
among us, should draw us away from our life.
Barnabas 3
1 So concerning these things, he says again unto them, Why do
you fast for me, says Yahweh, so that your voice is heard today
in its crying? This is not the fast that I have chosen, for a man
to humiliate his spirit, says Yahweh;466
Codex Sinaiticus:
2 Nor even if you bend your neck as a ring, and put under you
sackcloth and ashes – not even then will you call it an
acceptable fast.
3 But to us he says, See the fast which I have chosen, says
Yahweh, not that a man should humiliate his spirit, but that he
should loose every bond of unrighteousness and untie the
knots of the compacts of violence; set at liberty those who are
bruised and cancel every agreement of unrighteousness; break
your bread with the hungry and if you see the naked, clothe
him; bring those who are houseless into your dwelling - and if
you see a man that is lowly, despise him not, and turn not away
from those of your family.
4 Then will your light break forth early and your garments
spring up quickly and justice will go before you - and the glory
of Yahweh shall surround you.
5 Then shall you cry and Yahweh shall hearken unto you; while
you are yet speaking he shall say, Lo, I am here: if you put
away from you the league and the conspiracy and the word of
murmuring, and give your bread unto the hungry with all your
heart, and have compassion upon the spirit that is lowly.
6 The long-suffering Elohim therefore having seen beforehand
that the people whom he had prepared for his Beloved would
believe in simplicity, showed to us beforehand about all these
things, that we might not come as strangers to their law.
Barnabas 4
1 It behooves us, therefore, that we, searching much
concerning the things that are at hand, should seek out the
things that are able to save us. Let us fly, therefore, utterly
from all the work of unrighteousness, and let us hate the error
of the time that now is, that we may be loved in that which is to
come.
2 Let us not give liberty unto our spirit that it should have
leave to run with sinners and evil men, neither let us be made
like unto them.
3 The tribulation being made perfect is at hand, concerning
which it is written, as Enoch says, For to this purpose Yahweh
has cut short the times and the days, that His beloved might
make haste and come into his inheritance.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
467
4 The prophet also speaks in this wise: Ten kingdoms shall
reign upon the earth; and there shall rise up after them a little
king who shall humble three of the kings under one.
5 And in like manner Daniel speaks concerning him: And I saw
the fourth beast, evil and strong and harder than all the beasts
of the earth; and I saw how there grew up from him ten horns,
and from among them a little horn, growing up beside, and
how it humbled under one three of the great horns.
6 You ought, therefore, to understand. And moreover I ask this
of you, as being one among you, loving you especially and
altogether, even above my own spirit, that you should take
heed unto yourselves, and not be like unto certain men, by
adding to your sins and saying that their covenant is also ours.
Ours, indeed, it is; but they have lost it for ever, in this wise,
after that Moshe had already received it.
7 For the scripture says, And Moshe was in the mount fasting
forty days and nights, and he received the covenant from
Yahweh; even tables of stone written with the finger of the
hand of Yahweh. But when they turned unto idols they lost it.
8 For Yahweh says thus unto Moshe, Moshe, get you down
quickly, for your people, whom you brought out of the land of
Egypt, have disobeyed Torah. And Moshe understood, and cast
the two tables from his hands, and the covenant that was on
them was broken; to the end that that of the beloved Yahshua
might be sealed in our hearts in the hope of his faith.
9 Now, though I wished to write many things unto you, not as
a master, but even as suits one that loves you, not to fall short
of the things that we have, I have been zealous to write unto
you as though I were the offscouring of you. Let us, therefore,
give heed unto the last days; for the whole time of our faith will
profit us nothing unless now, in the season of iniquity and
among the stumbling-blocks that are coming, we resist as
becomes the sons of Elohim,
10 That the evil one may not have entrance unawares. Let us
fly all vanity and hate perfectly the deeds of the evil way. Do
not, entering into your own houses, dwell alone, as though you
were already justified, but coming together, inquire one with
another concerning the common advantage.
11 For the scripture says, Woe unto those who are wise in their
own conceit and learned in their own eyes. Let us be spiritual:
let us be a perfect temple unto Elohim. So far as in you lies, let468
Codex Sinaiticus:
us practise the fear of Elohim, and strive to keep his
commandments, that we may be glad in his ordinances.
12 Yahweh shall judge the world without respect of persons;
each shall receive according as he has done; if he be good,
righteousness shall go before him, but if he be evil, the reward
of wickedness shall be before him.
13 Let us give heed that we do not, as being already elect, take
rest, and sleep in our sins, lest the ruler of wickedness, getting
the mastery over us, thrust us from the kingdom of Yahweh.
14 And, moreover, my brethren, consider this. When you see
that after so many signs and wonders that have been done in
Israel, even then they have been abandoned, let us take heed
lest, as it is written, many of us be called but few chosen.
Barnabas 5
1 For on this account Yahweh endured to give his flesh unto
corruption, that we might be sanctified by the remission of
sins, which is by the sprinkling of his blood.
2 For there are written concerning him certain things that
pertain unto Israel, and certain other that pertain unto us. For
he speaks thus, He was wounded for our iniquities, and vexed
for our sins; by his stripes we are healed. He was led as a sheep
unto the slaughter, and like a lamb dumb before him that
shears it.
3 We ought, therefore, to give especial thanks unto Yahweh
because he has made known unto us the things that are past,
and has made us wise with regard to those that are at hand,
neither are we without understanding as regards the future.
4 For the scripture says, Not unjustly is the net stretched for
the birds. Now this means that a man will perish justly who,
having knowledge of the path of righteousness, shuts himself
up into the way of darkness.
5 Consider this too, my brethren; if Yahweh endured to suffer
for our spirits, though he were Yahweh of the whole world, to
whom Elohim said from the foundation of the world, Let us
make man according to our image and according to our
likeness, how then did he endure to suffer at the hands of
men? Learn you!
6 The prophets having received the grace from him prophesied
with regard to him. But he, that he might make death of noneThe H. T. Anderson New Testament
469
effect and bring to light the resurrection from the dead,
because it behoved him to be made manifest in the flesh,
7 Endured it, that he might give unto our fathers the promise,
and by preparing for himself a new people, might show, while
upon earth, that he will raise the dead and himself execute
judgment.
8 Yea, further; though he taught Israel and did so many signs
and wonders among them, yet they loved him not.
9 But when he chose out his own apostles, who were about to
preach his gospel, they were men unrighteous beyond all sin,
that he might show that he came not to call the righteous but
sinners to repentance; then made He himself manifest that he
was the Son of Elohim.
10 For if he had not come in the flesh how could men have
looked upon him and have been saved, since they cannot
endure to look at the rays of the sun which must one day
perish, and which is the work of his hands?
11 For this purpose did the Son of Elohim come in the flesh,
that he might sum up and finish the sin of them who
persecuted his prophets unto death;
12 Therefore he endured even unto this. For Elohim says that
the smiting of his flesh it was from them. When they shall
smite their shepherd, then shall the sheep of the flock be
scattered.
13 But He Himself wished thus to suffer, for it was necessary
that He should suffer upon the stake; for he who prophesies
about him says, Spare My spirit from the sword, and again,
Drive nails into My flesh, for the synagogues of evil men have
risen against Me.
14 And again he says, Behold, I have given My back unto the
scourging and My cheeks unto buffetings; My face also have I
set as a hard rock.
Barnabas 6
1 When, therefore, he made the commandment what says He?
Who is he that disputes with Me? Let him resist Me; or who is
he that contends with Me? Let him draw nigh unto the Son of
Yahweh.
2 Woe unto you, for you shall all wax old as a garment, and the
moth shall devour you. And again the prophet says, Since He
has been placed, as a strong stone, for crushing; behold I will470
Codex Sinaiticus:
place on the foundation of Zion a stone precious, elect, a chief
corner stone of great price.
3 And then what says He? And he that believes in Him shall
live for ever. Is then our hope in a stone? Elohim forbid. But it
is thus said because Yahweh has made strong his flesh, for He
says, and He made me as it were a hard rock.
4 And again, The stone which the builders rejected has become
the head of the corner. And again He says, This is the day,
great and wonderful, which Yahweh has made.
5 I write unto you the more simply that you may understand. I
am the offscouring of your love.
6 What then says the prophet again? The synagogue of the
wicked came around Me; they surrounded Me as bees do a
honey-comb, and, over My garment they cast lots.
7 Since, therefore, He was about to be made manifest and to
suffer in the flesh, His suffering was showed beforehand. For
the prophet says unto Israel, Woe unto their spirit, for they
have counselled an evil counsel among themselves, saying, Let
us bind the righteous because He is an encumbrance unto us.
8 And what says the other prophet, even Moshe, unto them?
Behold, thus says Yahweh Elohim: Enter into the good land
which Yahweh swore unto Abraham and Yitzchak and Yaakov,
and inherit it, even a land flowing with milk and honey.
9 What says the knowledge? Learn you. Hope, it says, upon
Yahshua, who is about to be manifested unto you in the flesh.
For man is but earth which suffers; for, from the face of the
ground was made the moulding of Adam.
10 What then means He when He says, Into the good land
which flows with milk and honey? Blessed be Yahweh,
brethren, who has put into you wisdom and knowledge of his
secret things. For the prophet speaks a parable from Yahweh.
Who shall understand, except he that is wise and skilful and
that loves his Master?
11 Since, therefore, having renewed us by the remission of our
sins, He has made us of a new character, He wills that we
should have the spirits of children, inasmuch as it is indeed He
who has formed us anew.
12 For the scripture says concerning us, that He says unto the
Son, Let us make man after our own image and according to
our likeness; and let them rule over the beasts of the earth, and
the fowls of heaven, and the fishes of the sea. And YahwehThe H. T. Anderson New Testament
471
said, when He saw how excellent our form was, Increase and
multiply and replenish the earth. These things he says unto the
Son.
13 Again I will show unto you how Yahweh speaks unto us,
since he has made a second fashioning in these last days;
Yahweh says, Behold I make the last even as the first. For to
this purpose did the prophet preach. Enter you into the land
flowing with milk and honey, and have dominion over it.
14 Behold now we have been formed again, even as he says
again in another prophet: Behold, says Yahweh, I will take out
from these, that is out of those whom the Spirit of Yahweh
foresaw, the hearts of stone, and will put into them hearts of
flesh, because he himself was about to be manifested in the
flesh and to dwell among us.
15 For the habitation of our heart is a temple holy unto
Yahweh.
16 For Yahweh says again, Whereby shall I appear before
Yahweh my Elohim and be glorified? He says too, I will give
thanks unto you in the assembly, in the midst of my brethren; I
will sing unto you in the midst of the assembly of the saints.
We are, therefore, those whom he brought into the good land.
17 What, then, means the milk and honey? It is because a child
is kept alive, first with honey, afterwards with milk. So we, too,
being quickened by faith in his promise and by his word, shall
live and rule over the earth.
18 And we said previously, And let them increase and multiply
and rule over the fish. Who then is he who is able to rule over
the beasts, the fish, and fowls of heaven? For we ought to
perceive that to rule belongs to authority, so that a man by
giving commands may exercise mastery.
19 If, therefore, this does not take place now, he has told us
when it will; even when we ourselves have been made perfect,
so that we become heirs of the covenant of Yahweh.
Barnabas 7
1 You perceive, therefore, beloved children, that our good
Master has manifested unto us all things beforehand, to the
end that we should know whom we ought to praise, returning
thanks for all things.
2 If, therefore, the Son of Elohim, being He who is Yahweh and
who is about to judge the quick and the dead, suffered, to the472
Codex Sinaiticus:
end that his stripes might make us live, let us know for certain
that the Son of Elohim could not suffer except on our account.
3 But being impaled, he was given to drink of vinegar and gall.
How, then, did the priests of the temple signify concerning
this? Now, the commandment is written in this wise:
Whosoever shall not fast on the fast, he shall die the death;
Yahweh has commanded it. Since he also was about to offer
the vessel that contained his spirit as a sacrifice, in order that
the type might be fulfilled which was given by the offering of
Yitzchak at the altar,
4 What says he in the book of the prophet? And let them eat of
the goat which is offered on the fast for the sins of all. Attend
you diligently thereto. And let the priests alone eat of the
unwashed entrails with vinegar.
5 With what signification? Because you will one day give Me to
drink of vinegar and gall, when I am about to offer up My flesh
for My new people, you eat it alone, while the people fast and
lament in sackcloth and ashes. He commanded this in order
that He might show that He had to suffer at their hands.
6 How, then, did he give His commands? Attend you. Take you
two goats, fair and like each other, and offer them up. And let
the priest take one of them as a whole burnt offering for sin.
7 But what shall they do with the other? Let the other, he says,
be accursed. Now attend you, how the type of Yahshua is made
manifest.
8 And do you all spit upon it and pierce it, and put scarlet wool
around its head, and so let it be cast out into the wilderness.
And when this has been done, he who bears the goat leads it
out into the wilderness, and takes away the wool and places it
upon a bush, which is called Rachel, the shoots of which we are
accustomed to eat when we find them in the fields. Thus the
fruit of the Rachel only is sweet.
9 What, therefore, means this? Attend you. One is brought to
the altar, the other is accursed, and the accursed one is
crowned, because they shall see Him in that day, who had the
scarlet robe about His flesh, and they shall say, Is not this He
whom once we set at naught and impaled, and spat upon and
pierced? Truly this was He who at that time said that He was
the Son of Yahweh.
10 How then was the one like to the other? In this respect were
the goats like Him: they were fair and equal, so that when theyThe H. T. Anderson New Testament
473
saw Him coming they were astonished at the likeness to the
goat. Therefore, behold here the type of Yahshua, who was
about to suffer.
11 And what means the wool placed in the midst of thorns? It is
a type of Yahshua, which has been placed in the congregation.
For he who wishes to take the scarlet wool must suffer many
things, because the thorn is terrible, and must after tribulation
gain possession of it. So he says, Those who would see me and
to take hold of my kingdom must through trouble and
suffering receive Me.
Barnabas 8
1 And what type, do you think was the commandment unto
Israel, that the men in whom sin had been accomplished
should offer a heifer, and after they had slaughtered it should
burn it, and that children should then take the ashes and cast
them into vessels, and place scarlet wool and hyssop around a
stick – behold, again, the type of the stake and the scarlet wool
– and so the children should sprinkle the people one by one,
that they might be purged from their sins?
2 Behold, therefore, in what way he speaks unto you with
simplicity. The heifer signifies Yahshua; the sinful men who
offer it are the men who brought him unto the slaughter. But
now the men are no longer before us, no longer does the glory
belong to sinners.
3 The children who sprinkled are those who brought us the
good news of the forgiveness of sins and purification of heart,
to whom He has given the authority of the gospel for the
purpose of preaching, being twelve in number, for a testimony
unto the tribes, for twelve were the tribes of Israel.
4 And why, then, were the children who sprinkled three in
number? For a testimony unto Abraham, Yitzchak, and
Yaakov, because these are great before Elohim.
5 And what signifies the wool upon the stick? Because the
kingdom of Yahshua is upon the stake, and because those who
hope upon him shall live for ever.
6 And why are there at the same time the wool and the hyssop?
Because in his kingdom the days in which we shall be saved
shall be evil and filthy, because also he that grieves His flesh is
healed through the purifying of the hyssop.474
Codex Sinaiticus:
7 And these things having been done on this account are
manifest unto us, but obscure unto them, because they
hearkened not unto the voice of Yahweh.
Barnabas 9
1 He says also again concerning our ears how he has
circumcised our heart. Yahweh says in the prophet, They have
hearkened unto Me with the hearing of their ears; and again,
He says, those who are far off shall hear with their ears; they
shall know what I have done; and be you circumcised, says
Yahweh, in your heart;
2 And again, Hear, O Israel, for thus says Yahweh your
Elohim; and again the Spirit of Yahweh prophesied, Who is he
that wishes to live for ever? Let him hearken unto the voice of
My Son.
3 And again He says, Hear, O heaven, and give ear, O earth, for
Yahweh has spoken these things for a testimony. And again He
says, Hearken unto the voice of Yahweh, you rulers of this
people. And again He says, Hearken you children unto the
voice of one crying in the wilderness.
4 To this end, therefore, has He circumcised our hearing, that
when we hear His word, we should believe; for the
circumcision in which they trust is done away with. For he has
said that circumcision is not that which was made in the flesh;
but they have transgressed, for an evil angel has deluded them.
5 He says unto them, These things says Yahweh your Elohim –
here I find a new commandment – Sow not among thorns, but
be you circumcised unto your Master. And what says he?
Circumcise the hardness of your hearts, and harden not your
neck. And again, Behold, says Yahweh, all the Gentiles are
uncircumcised in their foreskin, but this people is
uncircumcised in their hearts.
6 But He will say, Of a truth the people have been circumcised
for a seal unto them; but so, also, has every Syrian and
Arabian, and all the priests of idols. Do they also belong to the
covenant? But the Egyptians also are in circumcision.
7 Learn, therefore, children of love, richly concerning all
things, that Abraham, who first gave circumcision,
circumcised, looking forward in the spirit unto Yahshua,
having received the doctrines of the three letters.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
475
8 For he says, And Abraham circumcised out of his household
eighteen and three hundred. What, then, as the knowledge that
was given by this? Learn you that he mentions the eighteen
first, and then, having made an interval, he mentions the three
hundred. In the eighteen, IH*, you have Yahshua; and because
the stake in the letter T was about to convey the grace of
redemption, he mentions also the three hundred. Therefore, he
shows Yahshua in the two letters, IH, and the stake in the one,
T.
*That is, Iota (I) and Eta (H)
9 He knows this who has placed the engrafted gift of his
teaching in us. No one has had from me a more true account
than this; but I know that you are worthy.
Barnabas 10
1 But in that Moshe said, You shall not eat the swine, nor the
eagle, nor the hawk, nor the crow, nor any fish that has not
scales in itself, he had in his mind three doctrines.
2 For in the end he says unto them in Deuteronomy, And I will
arrange before this people my ordinances. The commandment
of Elohim is not, therefore, that they should not eat; but Moshe
spoke in a spiritual sense.
3 He spoke of the swine with this meaning: You shall not
cleave, he means, unto men of this sort, who are like unto
swine, for when they become wanton they forget their Master,
but when they are in want they think upon Yahweh; even as
the swine when it eats knows not its master, but when it is
hungry it cries, and when it has received it is again silent.
4 Nor shall you eat of the eagle, nor of the hawk, nor of the
kite, nor of the crow. You shall not, he means, cleave to, nor be
like to men of this sort, who know not how to provide
sustenance for themselves by labour and sweat, but in their
iniquity seize the property of others, and, as though they
walked in innocence, watch and observe whom they shall
plunder, through their covetousness; even as these birds alone
provide not sustenance for themselves by means of toil, but,
sitting idle, seek out how they may eat the flesh of others,
being destructive by reason of their wickedness.
5 And you shall not eat, he says, of the lamprey, or the polypus,
or the cuttle-fish. You shall not, he means, cleave to or become
like unto men of this sort, who are impious unto the end, and476
Codex Sinaiticus:
have been already condemned to death, even as these accursed
fish alone swim in the depth, not floating as the others do, but
dwelling in the earth below the depth of the sea.
6 Thus, he says, you shall not eat the hare, meaning you shall
not indulge in unnatural lusts;
7 Nor shall you eat the hyena, meaning you shall not be an
adulterer;
8 Nor shall you eat the weasel, meaning you shall not do
uncleanness with your mouth concerning food;
9 Therefore Moshe spoke in the spirit these three doctrines.
But they, according to the lusts of their flesh, received them as
being about meat.
10 And David receives knowledge concerning the same three
doctrines, and says in like manner, Blessed is the man who has
not walked in The counsel of the unrighteous, even as the fish
walk in darkness into the depths of the sea, and has not stood
in the way of sinners, even as those who pretend to fear
Yahweh sin as does the swine, and has not sat in the seat of the
destroyers, even as the birds that sit for prey. You have also in
the end a commandment concerning food;
11 But Moshe said, Eat you everything that is cloven-footed
and that chews the cud. What means he? He that takes food
knows him that feeds him, and, resting upon him, seems to be
glad. He therefore says well, having regard to the
commandment. What then means he? Cleave you unto those
who fear Yahweh, who walk in his commandments, which they
have received in their hearts; unto those who speak of the
ordinances of Yahweh, and observe them, unto them who
know that the practice of them is a work of gladness, and who
meditate on the word of Yahweh. But what means that which
cleaves the hoof? It means that the just walks even in this
world, and expects the holy life. Behold how well Moshe has
made this Torah!
12 But how was it possible for them to perceive or understand
these things? But we, having rightly understood the
commandments, speak them even as Yahweh has willed. On
this account has He circumcised our ears and hearts, that we
should understand these things.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
477
Barnabas 11
1 Let us inquire, therefore, if Yahweh cared to show us
beforehand concerning the water and concerning the stake.
Concerning the water it is written, with respect to Israel, how
that they will not receive the immersion that brings remission
of sins, but will establish one for themselves.
2 The prophet therefore speaks in this wise, Be astonished, O
heaven! And let the earth be afraid still more at this, because
this people has done two great and evil things: they have
abandoned Me who am the fountain of life, and have dug for
themselves broken cisterns.
3 Is my holy mountain of Zion a deserted rock? You shall be as
the young of a bird which have flown when the nest has been
taken away.
4 And again the prophet says, I will go before you and will lay
low the mountains. And I will break the doors of brass and
burst the bars of iron; and I will give unto you the treasures of
darkness hidden and unseen, that they may know that I am
Yahweh Elohim; and, He shall dwell in the lofty cave of the
strong rock.
5 Then what says he of the Son? His water is faithful. You shall
behold the king in his glory, and your spirit shall practice the
fear of Yahweh.
6 And again, in another prophet, he says, He that does these
things shall be as a tree that grows beside the watercourses,
which gives his fruit in his season; and his leaf shall not fall off,
and whatever he does shall prosper.
7 Not so are the unrighteous, not so; they are like the dust
which the wind carries away from the face of the earth,
wherefore the unrighteous shall not rise up in judgment, nor
sinners in the congregation of the just: for Yahweh knows the
way of the just, but the way of the unrighteous shall perish.
8 you perceive how he has put together the water and the
stake. For what he means is this, Blessed are those who having
hoped on the stake have gone down into the water. For he
speaks of a reward to be given at the due season; then, says he,
I will render what is due unto you. But now in that he says,
Their leaves shall not fall off, he means this, That every word
that goes out from your mouth in faith and love shall be for a
refuge and a hope unto many.478
Codex Sinaiticus:
9 And again another prophet says, And the land of Yaakov was
praised beyond the whole earth. By so saying He means this,
He shall glorify the vessel that contains his Spirit.
10 And what says he afterwards? There was a river flowing on
the right, and there grew up on its banks fair trees, and
whosoever eats of them shall live for ever.
11 By this he means that we go down into the water full of sin
and pollution, and go up bearing fruit in the heart, having in
the spirit fear and hope toward Yahshua. And whoever shall
eat of them shall live for ever. He means this, Whoever, He
says, shall hear these words spoken and believe them shall live
for ever.
Barnabas 12
1 In like manner again He signifies concerning the stake in
another prophet, who says, And when shall these things be
fulfilled? Yahweh says, When the tree has been bent and shall
rise up again, and when blood shall flow from the tree. You
have again a prophecy concerning the stake and about him
who is about to be impaled.
2 And he says again in Moshe, when Israel was being made
war upon by aliens, even that He might remind them while
they were being made war upon, that for their sins they were
being delivered over unto death, the Spirit says unto the heart
of Moshe, that he should make the form of a stake, and of Him
who was about to suffer, for if, He says, they shall not hope
upon Him, they will be made war upon for ever. Moshe,
therefore, arranges weapon against weapon in the midst of the
battle, and standing higher than all, stretched out his hands,
and so again Israel conquered; then, when he let them down,
they were again slaughtered.
3 Wherefore? that they might know that they are not to be
saved except they hope upon him.
4 And again, in another prophet, he says, All day long have I
stretched out my hands unto a people who are disobedient,
and who speak against My righteous way.
5 Again, Moshe makes another type of Yahshua, that it
behoves Him that he should suffer, and cause others to live,
whom they thought that they had destroyed in figure when
Israel was falling: For Yahweh made every kind of serpent to
bite them, and they died, since Eve committed theThe H. T. Anderson New Testament
479
transgression by means of the serpent, to the end that he
might convince those who through their transgression they
should be given over to the pangs of death.
6 For in the end Moshe himself, after that he had given
commandment, There shall not be among you a molten image
or a graven image for an elohim, makes one himself, that he
might show a type of Yahshua. Moshe, therefore, makes a
brazen serpent, and sets it aloft, and calls the people by a
proclamation.
7 When, therefore, they had come together they besought
Moshe, that he should offer supplication for them concerning
their healing. Moshe therefore said unto them, When any of
you is bitten let him come unto the dead serpent, that is placed
upon the tree, and let him believe and hope that, though it is
dead, it is able to make him live, and immediately he shall be
saved; and so did they. You have, therefore, again in these
things also, the glory of Yahshua, that in him and to him are all
things.
8 What again says Moshe unto Yahoshua the son of Nun, after
he had given this name to him, being a prophet, to this end
alone, that all the people might hear that the Father reveals all
things concerning the Son, Yahshua?
9 Moshe therefore says unto Yahoshua the son of Nun, having
given him this name, when he sent him to spy out the land,
Take the book into your hands and write what Yahweh says,
even that the Son of Yahweh, in the last days, will cut off the
whole house of Amalek from the roots.
10 Behold, therefore, again Yahshua, not the son of man but
the Son of Elohim, and by a type made manifest in the flesh.
Since, therefore, they should one day say that Moshiach is the
son of David, David himself prophesies, being in fear and
understanding the deceitfulness of sinners, Yahweh said unto
my Yahweh, Sit on my right hand until I make your enemies
your footstool.
11 And again Isaiah speaks in this wise, Yahweh said unto
Moshiach, my Master, whose right hand I have held, that the
Gentiles should hearken before him, and I will break the
strength of kings. Behold how David calls Him Yahweh, and
does not call him son.480
Codex Sinaiticus:
Barnabas 13
1 Let us inquire, therefore, whether this people or the first
people inherits, and whether the covenant is unto us or unto
them.
2 Hear, now, what the scripture says concerning the people.
But Yitzchak prayed for Rebecca his wife because she was
barren, and she conceived. Then Rebecca went forth to inquire
of Yahweh, and Yahweh said unto her, Two nations are in your
womb, and two peoples are in your bowels, and the one people
shall surpass the other, and the elder shall serve the younger.
3 We ought to understand who Yitzchak was and who Rebecca
was, and concerning whom he declared that the one people
was greater than the other.
4 And in another prophecy Yaakov speaks yet more clearly to
Yosef his son, saying, Behold Yahweh has not deprived me of
your face; bring unto me your sons, that I may bless them.
5 And he brought unto him Ephrayim and Manasheh, wishing
that he should bless Manasheh, because he was the elder.
Yosef, therefore, brought him to the right hand of his father
Yaakov. But Yaakov saw in spirit a figure of the people that
should be hereafter. And what says the Scriptures? And Yaakov
crossed his hands, and placed his right hand on the head of
Ephrayim, the second and youngest, and blessed him. And
Yosef said unto Yaakov, Change your right hand unto the head
of Manasheh, because he is my firstborn son. And Yaakov said
unto Yosef, I know, my child, I know; but the elder shall serve
the younger; but this one also shall be blessed.
6 Behold in what way he appointed that this people should be
the first and heir of the covenant.
7 If, therefore, it were moreover mentioned through Abraham
also, we have the perfecting of our knowledge. What, therefore,
says he unto Abraham, when he alone believed, and it was
counted unto him for righteousness? Behold I have made you,
Abraham, a father of the nations who in uncircumcision
believe in Yahweh.
Barnabas 14
1 Yes; but let us inquire whether he has given the covenant that
he swore unto the fathers that he would give unto the people.
Truly he has given it; but they were not worthy to receive it on
account of their sins.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
481
2 For the prophet says, And Moshe was fasting in Mount Sinai
forty days and forty nights, that he might receive the covenant
which Yahweh has made with his people. And he received from
Yahweh the two tables that were written in the spirit with the
finger of the hand of Yahweh. And Moshe, when he had
received them, was bringing them down to the people for to
give them.
3 And Yahweh said unto Moshe, Moshe, Moshe, get you down
quickly, for your people, whom you brought out of the land of
Egypt, have disobeyed Torah. And Moshe perceived that they
had again made molten images, and he cast the tables from his
hands, and the tables of the covenant of Yahweh were broken.
4 Moshe indeed received them, but the people were not
worthy. Hearken you, therefore, how we have received them.
Moshe received them being a servant, but Yahweh himself
gave unto us to be a people of inheritance, having suffered for
our sake.
5 And He was made manifest, that both they might be made
perfect in their sins, and that we, through Him that inherited,
might receive the covenant of the Master Yahshua, who, for
this purpose was prepared, that by appearing himself and
redeeming from darkness our hearts, which were already
lavished on death, and given over to the iniquity of deceit, he
might place in us the covenant of his people.
6 For it is written how the Father gives commandment unto
him, that having redeemed us from darkness, he should
prepare for himself a holy people.
7 Therefore the prophet says, I, Yahweh your Elohim, have
called you in righteousness, and I will hold your hand and
make you strong; and I have given you for a covenant to the
nation, for a light unto the Gentiles, to open the eyes of the
blind, and to bring out of chains those who are bound, and
from the house of prison those who sit in darkness. We know
from whence we were redeemed.
8 And again, the prophet says, Behold, I have placed you for a
light unto the Gentiles, that you should be for a salvation even
unto the end of the earth; thus says Yahweh Elohim who has
redeemed you.
9 And again, the prophet says, The Spirit of Yahweh is upon
me, because he has anointed me to preach the gospel unto the
poor, he has sent me to heal those that are broken in heart, to
preach deliverance to the captives, and the recovery of sight to482
Codex Sinaiticus:
the blind, to tell of the acceptable year of Yahweh, and the day
of recompense, to comfort all that mourn.
Barnabas 15
1 And, moreover, concerning the Shabbat it is written in the
Ten Commandments, in which he spoke on Mount Sinai unto
Moshe face to face: Sanctify you the Shabbat of Yahweh with
pure hands and a pure heart.
2 And in another place he says, If My sons shall keep My
Shabbat, then will I place My mercy upon them.
3 He speaks, too, of the Shabbat in the beginning of the
creation: And Elohim made in six days the works of his hands,
and finished them on the seventh day, and rested in it and
sanctified it.
4 Consider, my children, what signify the words, He finished
them in six days. They mean this: that in six thousand years
Yahweh will make an end of all things, for a day is with him as
a thousand years. And he himself bears witness unto me,
saying: Behold this day a day shall be as a thousand years.
Therefore, my children, in six days, that is in six thousand
years, shall all things be brought to an end.
5 And the words, He rested on the seventh day, signify this:
After that his Son has come, and has caused to cease the time
of the wicked one, and has judged the unrighteous, and
changed the sun and the moon and the stars, then shall he rest
well on the seventh day.
6 And further he says, you shall sanctify it with pure hands and
a pure heart. Who, therefore, can sanctify the day which
Yahweh has sanctified, unless he be pure of heart? in all things
have we been deceived.
7 Behold, that then indeed we shall be able to rest well and
sanctify; even when we ourselves, having been justified, and
having received the promise, when iniquity exists no longer,
but all things have been made new by Yahweh, we shall then
be able to sanctify it, having been first sanctified ourselves.
8 And, further, he says unto them, Your new moons and your
Shabbatot I cannot endure. See, now, what He means. The
Shabbatot that now are, are not acceptable unto Me, but that
which I have made is, even that in which, after that I have
brought all things to an end, I shall make a beginning of the
eighth day, which thing is the beginning of another world.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
483
9 Wherefore we also keep the eighth day as a day of gladness,
on which also we learned that Yahshua was risen from the
dead, and after he had appeared ascended unto heaven.
Barnabas 16
1 And I will, moreover, tell you concerning the temple, how
these wretched men, being deceived, placed their hopes in the
building as if it were the habitation of Elohim, and not on the
Elohim who has made them.
2 For almost after the manner of the Gentiles did they
consecrate Him in the temple. But what says Yahweh, making
it of no effect? Hearken you: Who has measured out the
heaven with his palm, or the earth with the flat of his hand, is
it not I? says Yahweh. Heaven is My throne, and earth the
footstool of My feet. What house will you build for Me, or what
shall be the place of My rest? You have known that their hope
was vain.
3 And, yet further, He says again, Behold those who have
destroyed this temple shall rebuild it.
4 And so is it done, for through their war it has been destroyed
by the enemy, and now both they themselves and the servants
of their enemies shall rebuild it.
5 And again it was made manifest how the temple and the
people of Israel should be given up to their enemies. For the
scripture says, And it shall come to pass in the last days that
Yahweh shall deliver up the sheep of his pasture, and their fold
and their tower shall he give up to destruction; and it was done
according to that which Yahweh had spoken.
6 Let us inquire, therefore, whether there be any temple of
Yahweh. There is; even where he himself has declared that he
would make and perfect it. For it is written, And it shall be
when the week is completed that the temple of Yahweh shall be
built gloriously in the name of Yahweh.
7 I find, therefore, that there is a temple; how then shall it be
built in the name of Yahweh? Learn you. Before that we
believed in Elohim the habitation of our heart was corrupt and
feeble, as being of a truth a temple built by hands. For it was
full of idolatry, and was a habitation of demons, because we
did such things as were contrary to Elohim;
8 But it shall be built in the name of Yahweh. Attend you: that
the temple of Yahweh may be built gloriously. But in what484
Codex Sinaiticus:
manner? Learn you: having received the remission of our sins,
and having hoped upon the name of Yahweh, we have become
new, having been again created entirely. Wherefore Elohim of
a truth dwells in us as in an habitation.
9 How? The word of his faith, the calling of his promise, the
wisdom of his ordinances, the commandments of his doctrine,
he himself prophesying in us, he himself dwelling in us. To us,
who were enslaved by death, he opens the gate of the temple,
which is his mouth, and, giving us repentance, leads us into the
temple incorruptible.
10 For he who desires to be saved looks not unto the man, but
unto him that dwells in him and speaks in him, wondering that
he had never before heard him speaking such words out of his
mouth, or even desired to hear. This is the spiritual temple
built by Yahweh.
Barnabas 17
1 So far as it is possible for me to show you these things with
simplicity, my mind and spirit hopes that I have not omitted
any of the things that pertain unto salvation;
2 For if I write unto you concerning the things that are at hand,
or the things that will be hereafter, you would not be able to
understand them, because they are couched in parables. These
things, therefore, are thus.
Barnabas 18
1 Let us pass on now to another kind of knowledge and
instruction. There are two paths of instruction and authority –
the one that of light, and the other that of darkness. But there
is a great difference between the two paths. For over the one
are appointed as illuminators the angels of Elohim, over the
other the angels of Satan;
2 On the one side is he who is Yahweh from everlasting to
everlasting, on the other is the ruler of the world that now lies
in wickedness.
Barnabas 19
1 Now, the path of life is this: If any one wishes to travel to the
appointed place, let him hasten by means of his works. Now,
the knowledge of walking in it that is given unto us is of this
kind:The H. T. Anderson New Testament
485
2 You shall love him that made you, you shall fear him that
formed you, you shall glorify him that redeemed you from
death. You shall be simple in heart, and rich in spirit; you shall
not cleave unto those who go in the path of death. You shall
hate whatever is not pleasing unto Elohim; you shall hate all
hypocrisy; you shall not abandon the commandments of
Yahweh;
3 You shall not exalt yourself; you shall be humble in all
things; you shall not take glory unto yourself; you shall not
take evil counsel against your neighbour; you shall not take
audacity into your spirit.
4 You shall not commit fornication, you shall not commit
adultery. You shall not pollute yourself with mankind: let not
the word of Elohim go forth from you in corruption. You shall
not accept the person of any to reprove any man for
transgression. You shall be gentle, you shall be quiet; you shall
tremble at the words that you have heard; you shall not bear
malice against your brother;
5 You shall not doubt whether a thing shall be or not; you shall
not take the name of Yahweh in vain. You shall love your
neighbor beyond your own spirit; you shall not kill a child by
abortion, neither shall you destroy it after it is born. You shall
not remove your hand from your son or your daughter, but
shalt teach them from their youth the fear of Yahweh.
6 You shall not covet your neighbor’s goods; you shall not be
an extortioner; you shall not cleave with your spirit unto the
proud, but you shall have your behavior with the lowly and the
just. Receive as blessings the troubles that come unto you,
knowing that without Elohim nothing is done.
7 You shall not be double-minded nor double-tongued, for to
be double-tongued is the snare of death. You shall submit
yourself to your masters as to the image of Elohim, with shame
and fear. You shall not give commands with bitterness to your
servant and your handmaid, who hope in the same Elohim as
you do, lest, perchance, you cease to fear Elohim, who is over
both. For he came not to call men with respect of persons, but
to call those whom the Spirit had prepared.
8 You shall communicate in all things with your neighbour,
and shalt not say that things are thine own. For if you be
partners in that which is incorruptible, how much more in the
things that are corruptible? You shall not be hasty of speech,486
Codex Sinaiticus:
for the mouth is a snare of death. As far as you are able, you
shall be pure concerning your spirit.
9 Be not a stretcher forth of your hand in receiving, and a
drawer back of it in giving. You shall love, as the apple of thine
eye, every one that speaks unto you the word of Yahweh.
10 You shall remember the Day of Judgment by night and by
day; and you shall seek out every day the persons of the saints.
11 You shall not doubt to give, nor shall you murmur in giving.
Give to every one that asks you, and you shall know who is the
good recompenser of the reward. You shall take care of that
which you have received, neither adding thereto, nor taking
therefrom. You shall hate the evil man unto the end, and shalt
judge justly.
12 You shall not make a schism, but shalt make peace by
bringing adversaries together. You shall make confession of
your sins. You shall not go unto prayer with an evil conscience.
This is the way of life, either labouring by means of the word
and proceeding to exhort, and practicing to save the spirit by
the word, or you shall work by your hands for the redemption
of your sins.
Barnabas 20
1 But the path of darkness is crooked and full of cursing, for it
is the path of eternal death and punishment, in which way are
the things that destroy the spirit. Idolatry, boldness, the pride
of power, hypocrisy, double-heartedness, adultery, murder,
rape, haughtiness, transgression, deceit, malice, self-will,
witchcraft, sorcery, covetousness, want of the fear of Elohim.
2 Here are those who are persecutors of the good, haters of
truth, lovers of lies; those who know not the reward of
righteousness, who cleave not to what is good nor unto just
judgment; who attend not to the widow and the orphan; who
are awake not unto the fear of Elohim, but unto evil; from
whom meekness and patience are afar off; who love the things
that are vain, who follow after recompense, who pity not the
poor, who labour not for him who is in trouble; who are
prompt to evil-speaking, who know not him that made them;
murderers of children, corruptors of the image of Elohim; who
turn away from the poor man and oppress the afflicted;
advocates of the rich, unjust judges of the poor, sinners in all
things.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
487
Barnabas 21
1 It is therefore right that he who has learned the ordinances of
Yahweh, even as many as have been written beforehand,
should walk in them. For he who does these things shall be
glorified in the kingdom of Elohim, but he who chooses the
contrary things shall perish together with his works. On this
account is the resurrection; on this account is the retribution.
2 I ask those who are of high estate among you, if you will
receive any friendly advice from me, keep those with you
toward whom you may do what is honorable. Fail not in so
doing.
3 The day is at hand in which everything shall perish together
with the evil one; Yahweh is nigh at hand, and his reward also.
4 Again and again do I ask you, be you good Torah-givers over
yourselves, be you good advisers of yourselves. Abide faithful
counsellors of one another; take out of the midst of you all
hypocrisy,
5 And may Elohim, who rules the whole world, give you
wisdom, understanding, science, knowledge of his ordinances,
and patience.
6 And be you taught of Elohim, inquiring what Yahweh seeks
of you, and so work that you may be found saved in the Day of
Judgment.
7 But if there is any memory of that which is good, remember
me while you practice these things, that both your desire and
your watching may turn unto some good.
8 I beseech you this, asking it as a favor. So long as the good
vessel is with you, fail not in any of these things, but seek them
out without ceasing, and fulfill all the commandments, for
these things are worthy.
9 Therefore I have been the more anxious to write unto you, so
far as I was able, to the end that I might make you glad.
Farewell, children of love and peace; the Elohim of glory and of
all grace be with your spirit. Amen.488
Codex Sinaiticus:
The Shepherd of Hermas
Shepherd 1
1 VISION ONE.
2 The master, who reared me, had sold me to one Rhoda in Rome.
3 After many years, I met her again, and began to love her as a sister.
4 After a certain time I saw her bathing in the river Tiber;
5 and I gave her my hand, and led her out of the river.
6 So, seeing her beauty, I reasoned in my heart, saying, Happy were
I, if I had such an one to wife both in beauty and in character.
7 I merely reflected on this and nothing more.
8 After a certain time, as I was journeying to Cumae, and glorifying
God’s creatures for their greatness and splendour and power, as I
walked I fell asleep.
9 And a Spirit took me, and bore me away through a pathless tract,
through which no man could pass
10 for the place was precipitous, and broken into clefts by reason of
the waters.
11 When then I had crossed the river, I came into the level country,
and knelt down, and began to pray to the Lord and to confess my
sins.
12 Now, while I prayed, the heaven was opened, and I see the lady,
whom I had desired, greeting me from heaven, saying, Good morrow,
Hermas.
13 And, looking at her, I said to her, Lady, what doest thou here?
14 Then she answered me, I was taken up, that I might convict thee
of thy sins before the Lord.
15 I said to her, Dost thou now convict me?
16 Nay, not so, said she, but hear the words, that I shall say to thee.
17 God, Who dwelleth in the heavens, and created out of nothing the
things which are, and increased and multiplied them for His holy
Church’s sake, is wroth with thee, for that thou didst sin against me.
18 I answered her and said, Sin, against thee?
19 In what way?
20 Did I ever speak an unseemly word unto thee?
21 Did I not always regard thee as a goddess?
22 Did I not always respect thee as a sister?
23 How couldst thou falsely charge me, lady, with such villainy and
uncleanness?
24 Laughing she saith unto me, The desire after evil entered into
thine heart.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
489
25 Nay, thinkest thou not that it is an evil deed for a righteous man, if
the evil desire should enter into his heart?
26 It is indeed a sin and a great one too, saith she;
27 for the righteous man entertaineth righteous purposes.
28 While then, his purposes are righteous, his repute stands stedfast
in the heavens, and he finds the Lord easily propitiated in all that he
does.
29 But they that entertain evil purposes in their hearts, bring upon
themselves death and captivity,
30 especially they that claim for themselves this present world, and
boast in its riches, and cleave not to the good things that are to come.
31 Their souls shall rue it, seeing that they have no hope, but have
abandoned themselves and their life.
Shepherd 2
1 AS soon as she had spoken these words the heavens were shut;
2 myself, If this sin is recorded against me, how can I be saved?
3 Or how shall I propitiate God for my sins which are full-blown?
4 Or with what words shall I entreat the Lord that He may be
propitious unto me?
5 While I was advising and discussing these matters in my heart,
6 I see before me a great white chair of snow-white wool and there
came an aged lady in glistening raiment, having a book in her hands,
7 and she sat down alone, and she saluted me, Good morrow,
Hermas.
8 Then I grieved and weeping, said, Good morrow, lady.
9 And she said to me, Why so gloomy, Hermas, thou that art patient
and good-tempered, and art always smiling?
10 Why so downcast in thy looks, and far from cheerful?
11 And I said to her, Because of an excellent lady saying that I had
sinned against her.
12 Then she said, Far be this thing from the servant of God !
Nevertheless the thought did enter into thy heart concerning her.
13 Now to the servants of God such a purpose bringeth sin.
14 For it is an evil and mad purpose to overtake a devout spirit that
hath been already approved,
15 that it should desire an evil deed, and especially if it be Hermas
the temperate, who abstaineth from every evil desire, and is full of all
simplicity and of great guilelessness.
Shepherd 3490
Codex Sinaiticus:
1 Yet it is not for this that God is wroth with thee, but that thou
mayest convert thy family, that hath done wrong against the Lord
and against you their parents.
2 But out of fondness for thy children thou didst not admonish thy
family, but didst suffer it to become fearfully corrupt.
3 Therefore the Lord is wroth with thee.
4 But He will heal all thy past sins, which have been committed in thy
family;
5 for by reason of their sins and iniquities thou hast been corrupted
by the affairs of this world.
6 But the great mercy of the Lord had pity on thee and thy family,
and will strengthen thee, and establish thee in His glory.
7 Only be not thou careless, but take courage, and strengthen thy
family.
8 For as the smith hammering his work conquers the task which he
wills, so also doth righteous discourse repeated daily conquer all evil.
9 Cease not therefore to reprove thy children;
10 for I know that if they shall repent with all their heart, they shall
be written in the books of life with the saints.
11 After these words of hers had ceased, she saith unto me, Wilt thou
listen to me as I read?
12 Then say I, Yes, lady.
13 She saith to me, Be attentive, and hear the glories of God.
14 I listened with attention and with wonder to that which I had no
power to remember;
15 for all the words were terrible, such as man cannot bear.
16 The last words however I remembered, for they were suitable for
us and gentle.
17 Behold, the God of Hosts, Who by His invisible and mighty power
and by His great wisdom created the world,
18 and by His glorious purpose clothed His creation with comeliness,
19 and by His strong word fixed the heaven,
20 and founded the earth upon the waters and by His own wisdom
and providence formed His Holy Church, which also He blessed-
behold,
21 He removeth the heavens and the mountains and the hills and the
seas,
22 and all things are made level for His elect,
23 that He may fulfil to them the promise which He promised with
great glory and rejoicing, if so be that they shall keep the ordinances
of God, which they received, with great faith.
Shepherd 4The H. T. Anderson New Testament
491
1 When then she finished reading and arose from her chair, there
came four young men, and they took away the chair, and departed
towards the East.
2 Then she calleth me unto her, and she touched my breast, and saith
to me, Did my reading please thee?
3 And I say unto her, Lady, these last words please me, but the
former were difficult and hard.
4 Then she spake to me, saying, These last words are for the
righteous, but the former are for the heathen and the rebellious.
5 While she yet spake with me, two men appeared, and took her by
the arms, and they departed, whither the chair also had gone towards
the East.
Shepherd 5
1 VISION TWO.
2 and I called to mind my last years vision as I walked;
3 and again a Spirit taketh me, and carrieth me away to the same
place as last year.
4 When then I arrived at the place, I fell upon my knees, and began
to pray to the Lord, and to glorify His name, for that he counted me
worthy, and made known unto me my former sins.
5 But after I had risen up from prayer, I behold before me the aged
lady, whom also I had seen last year, walking and reading a little
book.
6 And she saith to me, Canst thou report these things to the elect of
God?
7 I say unto her, Lady, I cannot recollect so much;
8 but give me the little book, that I may copy it.
9 Take it, saith she, and be sure and return it to me.
10 I took it, and retiring to a certain spot in the country I copied it
letter for letter:
11 for I could not make out the syllables.
12 When then I had finished the letters of the book, suddenly the
book was snatched out of my hand;
Shepherd 6
1 Now after fifteen days, when I had fasted and entreated the Lord
earnestly, the knowledge of the writing was revealed to me.
2 And this is what was written:
3 the Lord, and have betrayed their parents through great
wickedness, yea, they have got the name of betrayers of parents, and
yet they did not profit by their betrayal;492
Codex Sinaiticus:
4 and they still further added to their sins wanton deeds and reckless
wickedness;
5 and so the measure of their transgressions was filled up.
6 But make these words known to all thy children, and to thy wife
who shall be as thy sister;
7 for she too refraineth not from using her tongue, wherewith she
doeth evil.
8 But, when she hears these words, she will refrain, and will find
mercy.
9 After that thou hast made known unto them All these words,
10 which the Master commanded me that they should be revealed
unto thee, then all their sins which they sinned aforetime are
forgiven to them;
11 yea, and to all the saints that have sinned unto this day, if they
repent with their whole heart, and remove double-mindedness from
their heart.
12 For the Master sware by His own glory, as concerning His elect;
13 that if, now that this day has been set as a limit, sin shall hereafter
be committed, they shall not find salvation;
14 for repentance for the righteous hath an end;
15 the days of repentance are accomplished for all the saints;
16 whereas for the Gentiles there is repentance until the last day.
17 Thou shalt therefore say unto the rulers of the Church, that they
direct their paths in righteousness, that they may receive in full the
promises with abundant glory.
18 Ye therefore that work righteousness be stedfast, and be not
double-minded, that ye may have admission with the holy angels.
19 Blessed are ye, as many as endure patiently the great tribulation
that cometh, and as many as shall not deny their life.
20 For the Lord sware concerning His Son, that those who denied
their Lord should be rejected from their life, even they that are now
about to deny Him in the coming days;
Shepherd 7
1 But do thou, Hermas, no longer bear a grudge against thy children,
neither suffer thy sister to have her way,
2 so that they with a righteous chastisement, unless thou bear a
grudge against them thyself.
3 The bearing of a grudge worketh death.
4 But thou, Hermas, hast had great tribulations of thine own, by
reason of the transgressions of thy family, because thou hadst no care
for them.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
493
5 For thou wast neglectful of them, and wast mixed up with thine evil
transactions.
6 But herein is thy salvation, in that thou didst not depart from the
living God, and in thy simplicity and thy great continence.
7 These have saved thee, if thou abidest therein;
8 and they save all who do such things, and walk in guilelessness and
simplicity.
9 These men prevail over all wickedness, and continue unto life
eternal.
10 Blessed are all they that work righteousness.
11 They shall never be destroyed.
12 But thou shalt say to Maximus, “Behold tribulation cometh (upon
thee), if thou think fit to deny a second time.
13 The Lord is nigh unto them that turn unto Him, as it is written in
Eldad and Modat, who prophesied to the people in the wilderness.”
Shepherd 8
1 Now, brethren, a revelation was made unto me in my sleep by a
youth of exceeding fair form,
2 who said to me, Whom thinkest thou the aged woman, from whom
thou receivedst the book, to be?
3 I say, The Sibyl.
4 Thou art wrong, saith be, she is not.
5 Who then is she?
6 I say.
7 The Church, saith he.
8 I said unto him, Wherefore then is she aged?
9 Because, saith he, she was created before all things;
10 therefore is she aged;
11 and for her sake the world was framed.
12 And afterwards I saw a vision in my house.
13 The aged woman came, and asked me, if I had already given the
book to the elders.
14 I said that I had not given it.
15 Thou hast done well, she said, for I have words to add.
16 When then I shall have finished all the words, it shall be made
known by thy means to all the elect.
17 Thou shalt therefore write two little books, and shalt send one to
Clement, and one to Grapte.
18 So Clement shall send to the foreign cities, for this is his duty;
19 while Grapte shall instruct the widows and the orphans.494
Codex Sinaiticus:
Shepherd 9
1 VISION THREE.
2 fasting often, and entreating the Lord to declare unto me the
revelation which He promised to show me by the mouth of the aged
woman,
3 that very night the aged woman was seen of me,
4 and she said to me, Seeing that thou art so importunate and eager
to know all things, come into the country where thou abidest,
5 and about the fifth hour I will appear, and will show thee what thou
oughtest to see.
6 I asked her, saying, Lady, to what part of the country ?
7 Where thou wilt, saith she.
8 I selected a beautiful and retired spot;
9 but before I spoke to her and named the spot, she saith to me, I will
come, whither thou willest.
10 I went then, brethren, into the country, and I counted up the
hours, and came to the place where I appointed her to come,
11 and I see an ivory couch placed there, and on the couch there lay a
linen cushion, and on the cushion was spread a coverlet of fine linen
of flax.
Shepherd 10
1 When I saw these things so ordered, and no one in the place,
2 I was amazed, and a fit of trembling seized me, and my hair stood
on end and a fit of shuddering came upon me, because I was alone.
3 When then I recovered myself, and remembered the glory of God,
and took courage, I knelt down and confessed my sins to the Lord
once more, as I had done on the former occasion.
Shepherd 11
1 Then she came with six young men, the same whom I had seen
before, and she stood by me, and listened attentively to me, as I
prayed and confessed my sins to the Lord.
2 And she touched me, and said:
3 Hermas, make an end of constantly entreating for thy sins;
4 entreat also for righteousness, that thou mayest take some part
forthwith to thy family.
5 Then she raiseth me by the hand, and leadeth me to the couch, and
saith to the young men, Go ye, and build.
6 And after the young men had retired and we were left alone, she
saith to me, Sit down here.
7 I say to her, Lady, let the elders sit down first.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
495
8 Do as I bid thee, saith she, sit down.
9 When then I wanted to sit down on the right side, she would not
allow me, but beckoned me with her hand that I should sit on the left
side.
10 As then I was musing thereon, and was sad because she would not
permit me to sit on the right side, she saith to me, Art thou sad,
Hermas?
11 The place on the right side is for others, even for those who have
already been well-pleasing to God, and have suffered for the Names
sake.
12 But thou lackest much that thou shouldest sit with them;
13 but as thou abidest in thy simplicity, even so continue, and thou
shalt sit with them, thou and as many as shall have done their deeds,
and have suffered what they suffered.
Shepherd 12
1 What did they suffer?
2 say I.
3 Listen, saith she.
4 Stripes, imprisonments, great tribulations, crosses, wild beasts, for
the Names sake.
5 Therefore to them belongs the right side of the Holiness-to them,
and to all who shall suffer for the Name.
6 But for the rest is the left side.
7 Howbeit, to both, to them that sit on the right, and to them that sit
on the left, are the same gifts, and the same promises, only they sit
on the right and have a certain glory.
8 Thou indeed art very desirous to sit on the right with them, but thy
shortcomings are many;
9 yet thou shalt be purified from thy shortcomings;
Shepherd 13
1 When she had said this, she wished to depart;
2 but, falling at vision which she promised.
3 Then she again took me by the hand, and raiseth me, and seateth
me on the couch at the left hand, while she herself sat on the right.
4 And lifting up a certain glistening rod, she saith to me, Seest thou a
great thing?
5 I say to her, Lady, I see nothing.
6 She saith to me, Look thou;
7 dost thou not see in front of thee a great tower being builded upon
the waters, of glistening square stones?496
Codex Sinaiticus:
8 Now the tower was being builded foursquare by the six young men
that came with her.
9 And countless other men were bringing stones, some of them from
the deep, and others from the land, and were handing them to the six
young men.
10 And they took them and builded.
11 The stones that were dragged from the deep they placed in every
case,
12 just as they were, into the building, for they had been shaped, and
they fitted in their joining with the other stones;
13 and they adhered so closely one with another that their joining
could not possibly be detected;
14 and the building of the tower appeared as if it were built of one
stone.
15 But of the other stones which were brought from the dry land,
some they threw away, and some they put into the building;
16 and others they broke in pieces, and threw to a distance from the
tower.
17 Now many other stones were lying round the tower, and they did
not use them for the building;
18 for some of them were mildewed, and others had cracks ill them,
and others were too short, and others were white and round, and did
not fit into the building.
19 And I saw other stones thrown to a distance from the tower, and
coming to the way, and yet not staying in the way, but rolling to
where there was no way;
20 and others falling into the fire and burning there;
Shepherd 14
1 When she had shown me these things, she wished to hurry these
things, and yet not to know what the things mean?
2 She answered and said unto me, Thou art an over-curious fellow, in
desiring to know all that concerns the tower.
3 Yea, lady, I said, that I may announce it to any brethren, and that
they [may be the more gladdened and] when they hear [these things]
may know the Lord in great glory.
4 Then said she, Many shall hear;
5 but when they hear, some of them shall be glad, and others shall
weep.
6 Yet even these latter, if they hear and repent, shall likewise be glad.
7 Hear thou therefore the parables of the tower;
8 for I will reveal all things unto thee.
9 And trouble me no more about revelation;The H. T. Anderson New Testament
497
10 for these revelations have an end, seeing that they have been
completed.
11 Nevertheless thou wilt not cease asking for revelations;
12 for thou art shameless.
Shepherd 15
1 The tower, which thou seest building, is myself, the Church, which
was seen of thee both now and aforetime.
2 Ask, therefore, what thou willest concerning the tower, and I will
reveal it unto thee, that thou mayest rejoice with the saints.
3 I say unto her, Lady, since thou didst hold me worthy once for all,
that thou shouldest reveal all things to me, reveal them.
4 Then she saith to me, Whatsoever is possible to be revealed to thee,
shall be revealed.
5 Only let thy heart be with God, and doubt not in thy mind about
that which thou seest.
6 I asked her, Wherefore is the tower builded upon waters, lady?
7 I told thee so before, said she, and indeed thou dost enquire
diligently.
8 So by thy enquiry thou discoverest the truth.
9 Hear then why the tower is builded upon waters;
10 it is because your life is saved and shall be saved by water.
Shepherd 11
1 I answered and said unto her,
2 Lady, this thing is great and These are the holy angels of GOD, that
were created first of all, unto whom the Lord delivered all His
creation to increase and to build it, and to be masters of all creation.
3 By their hands therefore the building of the tower will be
accomplished.
4 And who are the others who are bringing the stones?
5 They also are holy angels of God;
6 but these six are superior to them.
7 The building of the tower then shall be accomplished, and all alike
shall rejoice in the (completed) circle of the tower, and shall glorify
God that the building of the tower was accomplished.
8 I enquired of her, saying, Lady, I could wish to know concerning
the end of the stones, and their power, of what kind it is.
9 She answered and said unto me, It is not that thou of all men art
especially worthy that it should be revealed to thee;
10 for there are others before thee, and better than thou art, unto
whom these visions ought to have been revealed.498
Codex Sinaiticus:
11 But that the name of God may be glorified,
12 it hath been revealed to thee, and shall be revealed, for the sake of
the doubtful-minded, who question in their hearts whether these
things are so or not.
13 Tell them that all these things are true, and that there is nothing
beside the truth, but that all are stedfast, and valid, and established
on a firm foundation.
Shepherd 17
1 Hear now concerning the stones that go to the building.
2 The stones that are squared and white, and that fit together in their
joints,
3 these are the apostles and bishops and teachers and deacons,
4 who walked after the holiness of God,
5 and exercised their office of bishop and teacher and deacon in
purity and sanctity for the elect of God, some of them already fallen
on sleep, and others still living.
6 And because they always agreed with one another, they both had
peace among themselves and listened one to another.
7 Therefore their joinings fit together in the building of the tower.
8 But they that are dragged from the deep, and placed in the
building, and that fit together in their joinings with the other stones
that are already builded in, who are they?
9 These are they that suffered for the name of the Lord.
10 But the other stones that are brought from the dry land, I would
fain know who these are, lady.
11 She said, Those that go to the building, and yet are not hewn, these
the Lord hath approved because they walked in the uprightness of
the Lord, and rightly performed His commandments.
12 But they that are brought and placed in the building, who are
they?
13 They are young in the faith, and faithful;
14 but they are warned by the angels to do good, because wickedness
was found in them.
15 But those whom they rejected and threw away, who are they?
16 These have sinned, and desire to repent, therefore they were not
cast to a great distance from the tower, because they will be useful for
the building, if they repent.
17 They then that shall repent, if they repent, will be strong in the
faith, if they repent now while the tower is building.
18 But if the building shall be finished, they have no more any place,
but shall be castaways.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
499
Shepherd 18
1 But wouldst thou know about them that are broken in pieces, and
cast away far from the tower?
2 These are the sons of wickedness was absent from them.
3 Therefore they have not salvation, for they are not useful for
building by reason of their wickednesses.
4 Therefore they were broken up and thrown far away by reason of
the wrath of the Lord, for they excited Him to wrath.
5 But the rest whom thou hast seen lying in great numbers, not going
to the building, of these they that are mildewed are they that knew
the truth, but did not abide in it, nor cleave to the saints.
Shepherd 19
1 But they that have the cracks, who are they?
2 These are they at peace among themselves;
3 who have an appearance of peace, but when they depart from one
another, their wickednesses abide in their hearts.
4 These are the cracks which the stones have.
5 But they that are broken off short, these have believed, and have
their greater part in righteousness, but have some parts of
lawlessness;
Shepherd 20
1 But the white and round stones, which did not fit into the building,
who are they, lady?
2 She answered and said to me, How understandest nothing?
3 These are they that have faith, but have also riches of this world.
4 When tribulation cometh, they deny their Lord by reason of their
riches and their business affairs.
5 And I answered and said unto her, When then, lady, will they be
useful for the building ?
6 When, she replied, their wealth, which leadeth their souls astray,
shall be cut away, then will they be useful for God.
7 For just as the round stone, unless it be cut away, and lose some
portion of itself, cannot become square,
8 so also they that are rich in this world, unless their riches be cut
away, cannot become useful to the lord.
9 Learn first from thyself.
10 When thou hadst riches, thou wast useless;
11 but now thou art useful and profitable unto life.
Shepherd 21500
Codex Sinaiticus:
1 But the other stones which thou sawest cast far away from the
tower and falling into the way and rolling out of the way into
believed,
2 but by reason of their double heart they abandon their true way.
3 Thus thinking that they can find a better way, they go astray and
are sore distressed, as they walk about in the regions where there is
no way.
4 But they that fall into the fire and are burned,
5 these are they that finally rebelled from the living God,
6 and it no more entered into their hearts to repent by reason of the
lusts of their wantonness and of the wickednesses which they
wrought.
7 But the others, which fall near the waters and yet cannot roll into
the water, wouldest thou know who are they?
8 These are they that heard the word, and would be baptized unto the
name of the Lord.
9 Then, when they call to their remembrance the purity of the truth,
they change their minds, and go back again after their evil desires.
10 So she finished the explanation of the tower.
11 Still importunate, I asked her further, whether for all these stones
that were rejected and would not fit into the building of the tower
there was repentance, and they had a place in this tower.
12 They can repent, she said, but they cannot be fitted into this tower.
13 Yet they shall be fitted into another place much more humble, but
not until they have undergone torments, and have fulfilled the days
of their sins.
14 And they shall be changed for this reason, because they
participated it, the Righteous Word;
15 and then shall it befall them to be relieved from their torments, if
the evil deeds, that they have done, come into their heart;
Shepherd 22
1 When then I ceased asking her concerning all these things, desirous
of beholding, I was greatly rejoiced that I should see it.
2 She looked upon me, and smiled, and she saith to me, Seest thou
seven women round the tower?
3 I see them, lady, say I.
4 This tower is supported by them by commandment of the Lord.
5 Hear now their employments.
6 The first of them, the woman with the strong hands, is called Faith;
7 through her are saved the elect of God.
8 And the second, that is girded about and looketh like a man, is
called Continence;The H. T. Anderson New Testament
501
9 she is the daughter of Faith.
10 Whosoever then shall follow her, becometh happy in his life, for
he shall refrain from all evil deeds, believing that, if he refrain from
every evil desire, he shall inherit eternal life.
11 And the others, lady, who be they?
12 They are daughters one of the other.
13 The name of the one is Simplicity, of the next, knowledge, of the
next, Guilelessness, of the next, Reverence, of the next, Love.
14 When then thou shalt do all the works of their mother, thou canst
live.
15 I would fain know, lady, I say, what power each of them
possesseth.
16 Listen then, saith she, to the powers which they have.
17 Their powers are mastered each by the other, and they follow each
other, in the order in which they were born.
18 From Faith is born Continence, from Continence Simplicity, from
Simplicity Guilelessness, from Guilelessness Reverence, from
Reverence knowledge, from knowledge Love.
19 Their works then are pure and reverent and divine.
20 Whosoever therefore shall serve these women, and shall have
strength to master their works, shall have his dwelling in the tower
with the saints of God.
21 Then I asked her concerning the seasons, whether the
consummation is even now.
22 But she cried aloud, saying, Foolish man, seest thou not that the
tower is still a-building?
23 Whensoever therefore the tower shall be finished building, the
end cometh;
24 but it shall be built up quickly.
25 Ask me no more questions:
26 this reminder is sufficient for you and for the saints, and is the
renewal of your spirits.
27 But it was not revealed to thyself alone, but in order that thou
mightest show these things unto all.
28 After three days-for thou must understand first,
29 and I charge thee, Hermas, first with these words, which I am
about to speak to thee-(I charge thee to) tell all these things into the
ears of the saints,
30 that hearing them and doing them they may be purified from their
wickednesses, and thyself also with them.
Shepherd 23
1 Hear me, my children.502
Codex Sinaiticus:
2 I brought you up in much simplicity and guilelessness and
reverence,
3 through the mercy of the Lord, Who instilled righteousness into
you, that ye might be justified and sanctified from all wickedness and
all crookedness.
4 But ye will not to cease from your wickedness.
5 Now then hear me and be at peace among your, selves, and have
regard one to another, and assist one another,
6 and do not partake of the creatures of God alone in abundance, but
share them also with those that are in want.
7 For some men through their much eating bring weakness on the
flesh, and injure their flesh:
8 whereas the flesh of those who have nought to eat is injured by
their not having sufficient nourishment, and their body is ruined.
9 This exclusiveness therefore is hurtful to you that have and do not
share with them that are in want.
10 Look ye to the judgment that cometh.
11 Ye then that have more than enough, seek out them that are
hungry, while the tower is still unfinished;
12 for after the tower is finished, ye will desire to do good, and will
find no place for it.
13 Look ye therefore, ye that exult in your wealth,
14 lest they that are in want shall moan, and their moaning shall go
up unto the Lord, and ye with your [abundance of) good things be
shut outside the door of the tower.
15 Now therefore I say unto you that are rulers of the Church, and
that occupy the chief seats;
16 be not ye like unto the sorcerers.
17 The sorcerers indeed carry their drugs in boxes,
18 but ye carry your drug and your poison in your heart Ye are case-
hardened,
19 and ye will not cleanse your hearts and mix your wisdom together
in a clean heart, that ye may obtain mercy from the Great King.
20 Look ye therefore, children, lest these divisions of yours deprive
you of your life.
21 How is it that ye wish to instruct the elect of the Lord, while ye
yourselves have no instruction?
22 Instruct one another therefore, and have peace among yourselves,
that I also may stand gladsome before the Father, and give an
account concerning you all to your Lord.
Shepherd 24The H. T. Anderson New Testament
503
1 When then she ceased speaking with me, the six young men, who
were building, came, and took her away to the tower, and other four
lifted the couch, and took it also away to the tower.
2 I saw not the face of these, for they were turned away.
3 And, as she went, I asked her to reveal to me concerning the three
forms, in which she had appeared to me.
4 She answered and said to me;
5 As concerning these things thou must ask another, that they may be
revealed to thee.
6 Now she was seen of me, brethren, in my first vision of last year, as
a very aged woman and seated on a chair.
7 In the second vision her face was youthful, but her flesh and her
hair were aged, and she spake to me standing;
8 and she was more gladsome than before.
9 But in the third vision she was altogether youthful and of exceeding
great beauty, and her hair alone was aged;
10 and she was gladsome exceedingly and seated on a couch.
11 Touching these things I was very greatly anxious to learn this
revelation.
12 And I see the aged woman in a vision of the night, saying to me,
Every enquiry needs humility.
13 Fast therefore, and thou shalt receive what thou askest from the
Lord.
14 So I fasted one day;
15 and that very night there appeared unto me a young man, and he
saith to me, Seeing that thou askest me revelations offhand with
entreaty, take heed lest by thy much asking thou injure thy flesh.
16 Sufficient for thee are these revelations.
17 Canst thou see mightier revelations than those thou hast seen?
18 I say unto him in reply, Sir, this one thing alone I ask, concerning
the three forms of the aged woman, that a complete revelation may
be vouchsafed me.
19 He saith to me in answer, How long are ye without
understanding?
20 It is your double-mindedness that maketh you of no
understanding, and because your heart is not set towards the Lord.
Shepherd 25
1 Listen, saith he, concerning the three forms, of which thou
enquirest.
2 In the first vision wherefore did she appear to aged, and already
decayed, and had no power by reason of your infirmities and acts of
double-mindedness.504
Codex Sinaiticus:
3 For as aged people, having no longer hope of renewing their youth,
expect nothing else but to fall asleep,
4 so ye also, being weakened with the affairs of this world, gave
yourselves over to repining, and cast not your cares on the Lord;
5 but your spirit was broken, and ye were aged by your sorrows.
6 Wherefore then she was seated on a chair, I would fain know, Sir.
7 Because every weak person sits on a chair by reason of his
weakness, that the weakness of his body may be supported.
Shepherd 26
1 But in the second vision thou sawest her standing, and with her
countenance more youthful and more gladsome than before;
2 saith he.
3 Imagine an old man, who has now lost all hope of himself by reason
of his weakness and his poverty, and expecteth nothing else save the
last day of his life.
4 Suddenly an inheritance is left him.
5 He heareth the news, riseth up and full of joy clothes himself with
strength, and no longer lieth down, but standeth up,
6 and his spirit, which was now broken by reason of his former
circumstances, is renewed again, and he no longer sitteth, but taketh
courage;
7 so also was it with you, when ye heard the revelation which the
Lord revealed unto you.
8 For He had compassion on you, and renewed your spirits,
9 and ye laid aside your maladies, and strength came to you, and ye
were made powerful in the faith, and the Lord rejoiced to see you put
on your strength.
10 And therefore He showed you the building of the tower;
Shepherd 27
1 But in the third vision ye saw her younger and fair and cometh
some piece of good tidings,
2 immediately he forgetteth his former sorrows,
3 and admitteth nothing but the tidings which he hath heard, and is
strengthened thenceforth unto that which is good, and his spirit is
renewed by reason of the joy which he hath received;
4 so also ye have received a renewal of your spirits by seeing these
good things.
5 And whereas thou sawest her seated on a couch, the position is a
firm one;
6 for the couch has four feet and standeth firmly;
7 for the world too is upheld by means of four elements.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
505
8 They then that have fully repented shall be young again, and
founded firmly, seeing that they have repented with their whole
heart.
9 There thou hast the revelation entire and complete.
Shepherd 28
1 VISION FOUR The fourth vision which I saw, brethren, twenty
days after tribulation.
2 I was going into the country by the Campanian Way.
3 From the high road, it is about ten stades;
4 and the place is easy for travelling.
5 While then I am walking alone,
6 I entreat the Lord that He will accomplish the revelations and the
visions which He showed me through His holy Church,
7 that He may strengthen me and may give repentance to His
servants which have stumbled,
8 that His great and glorious Name may be glorified, for that He held
me worthy that He should show me His marvels.
9 And as I gave glory and thanksgiving to Him, there answered me as
it were the sound of a voice, Be not of doubtful mind Hermas.
10 I began to question in myself and to say, How can I be of doubtful
mind, seeing that I am so firmly founded by the Lord, and have seen
glorious things?
11 And I went on a little, brethren, and behold, I see a cloud of dust
rising as it were to heaven, and I began t> say within myself, Can it
be that cattle are coming, and raising a cloud of dust ?
12 for it was just about a stade from me.
13 As the cloud of dust waxed greater and greater, I suspected that it
was something supernatural.
14 Then the sun shone out a little, and behold, I see a huge beast like
some sea-monster, and from its mouth fiery locusts issued forth.
15 And the beast was about a hundred feet in length, and its head was
as it were of pottery.
16 And I began to weep, and to entreat the Lord that He would rescue
me from it.
17 And I remembered the word which I had heard, Be not of doubtful
mind, Hermas.
18 Having therefore, brethren, put on the faith of the Lord and called
to mind the mighty works that He had taught me, I took courage and
gave myself up to the beast.
19 Now the beast was coming on with such a rush, that it might have
ruined a city.506
Codex Sinaiticus:
20 I come near it, and, huge monster as it was, it stretcheth itself on
the ground, and merely put forth its tongue, and stirred not at all
until I had passed by it.
21 And the beast had on its head four colours;
Shepherd 29
1 Now after I had passed the beast,
2 and had gone forward about thirty feet, behold, there meeteth me a
virgin arrayed as if she sandals, veiled up to her forehead, and her
head-covering consisted of a turban, and her hair was white.
3 I knew from the former visions that it was the Church, and I
became more cheerful.
4 She saluteth me, saying, Good morrow, my good man;
5 and I saluted her in turn, Lady, good morrow.
6 She answered and said unto me, Did nothing meet thee?
7 I say unto her, Lady, such a huge beast, that could have destroyed
whole peoples :
8 but, by the power of the Lord and by His great mercy, I escaped it.
9 Thou didst escape it well, saith she,
10 because thou didst cast thy care upon God, and didst open thy
heart to the Lord, believing that thou canst be saved by nothing else
but by His great and glorious Name.
11 Therefore the Lord sent His angel, which is over the beasts, whose
name is Segri, and shut its mouth, that it might not hurt thee.
12 Thou hast escaped a great tribulation by reason of thy faith, and
because, though thou sawest so huge a beast, thou didst not doubt in
thy mind.
13 Go therefore, and declare to the elect of the Lord His mighty
works, and tell them that this beast is a type of the great tribulation
which is to come.
14 If therefore ye prepare yourselves beforehand,
15 and repent (and turn) unto the Lord with your whole heart, ye
shall be able to escape it, if your heart be made pure and without
blemish, and if for the remaining days of your life ye serve the Lord
blamelessly.
16 Cast your cares upon the Lord and He will set them straight.
17 Trust ye in the Lord, ye men of doubtful mind, for He can do all
things, yea, He both turneth away His wrath from you, and again He
sendeth forth His plagues upon you that are of doubtful mind.
18 Woe to them that hear these words and are disobedient;
Shepherd 30The H. T. Anderson New Testament
507
1 I asked her concerning the four colours, which the beast had upon
its head.
2 Then she answered me and said, Again thou art me what these
things are.
3 Listen, said she;
4 the black is this world in which ye dwell;
5 and the fire and blood colour showeth that this world must perish
by blood and fire;
6 and the golden part are ye that have escaped from this world.
7 For as the gold is tested by the fire and is made useful, so ye also
[that dwell in it] are being tested in yourselves.
8 Ye then that abide and pass through the fire will be purified by it.
9 For as the gold loses its dross, so ye also shall cast away all sorrow
and tribulation, and shall be purified, and shall be useful for the
building of the tower.
10 But the white portion is the coming age, in which the elect of God
shall dwell;
11 because the elect of God shall be without spot and pure unto life
eternal.
12 Wherefore cease not thou to speak in the ears of the saints.
13 Ye have now the symbolism also of the tribulation which is coming
in power.
14 But if ye be willing, it shall be nought.
15 Remember ye the things that are written beforehand.
16 With these words she departed, and I saw not in what direction
she departed;
17 for a noise was made;
Shepherd 31
1 REVELATION FIVE.
2 As I prayed in the house, and sat on the couch,
3 there entered a skin wrapped about him, and with a wallet on his
shoulders and a staff in his hand.
4 And he saluted me, and I saluted him in return.
5 And he immediately sat down by my side, and he saith unto me, I
was sent by the most holy angel, that I might dwell with thee the
remaining days of thy life.
6 I thought he came to tempt me, and I say unto him, Why, who art
thou?
7 For I know, say I, unto whom I was delivered.
8 He saith to me, Dost thou not recognise me?
9 No, I say.508
Codex Sinaiticus:
10 I, saith he, am the shepherd, unto whom thou wast delivered.
11 While he was still speaking, his form was changed, and I
recognised him as being the same, to whom I was delivered;
12 and straightway I was confounded, and fear seized me, and I was
altogether overwhelmed with distress that I had answered him so
wickedly and senselessly.
13 But he answered and said unto me, Be not confounded, but
strengthen thyself in my commandments which I am about to
command thee.
14 For I was sent, saith he, that I might show thee again all the things
which thou didst see before, merely the heads which are convenient
for you.
15 First of all, write down my commandments and my parables;
16 and the other matters thou shalt write down as I shall show them
to thee.
17 The reason why, saith he, I command thee to write down first the
commandments and parables is, that thou mayest read them off-
hand, and mayest be able to keep them.
18 So I wrote down the commandments and parables, as he
commanded me.
19 If then, when ye hear them, ye keep them and walk in them, and
do them with a pure heart, ye shall receive from the Lord all things
that He promised you;
20 but if, when ye hear them, ye do not repent, but still add to your
sins, ye shall receive from the Lord the opposite.
Shepherd 32
1 MANDATE THE FIRST.
2 First of all, believe that God is One,
3 even He Who created all non-existence into being, Who
comprehendeth all things, being alone incomprehensible.
4 Believe Him therefore, and fear Him, and in this fear be continent.
5 Keep these things,
6 and thou shall cast off all wickedness from thyself, and shall clothe
thyself with every excellence of righteousness, and shall live unto
God, if thou keep this commandment.
Shepherd 33
1 MANDATE THE SECOND.
2 He saith to me;
3 Keep simplicity and be guileless, and thou shall be as little children,
that know not the wickedness which destroyeth the life of men.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
509
4 First of all, speak evil of no man, neither take pleasure in listening
to a slanderer.
5 Otherwise thou that hearest too shalt be responsible for the sin of
him that speaketh the evil, if thou believest the slander, which thou
hearest;
6 for in believing it thou thyself also wilt have a grudge against thy
brother.
7 So then shalt thou be responsible for the sin of him that speaketh
the evil.
8 Slander is evil;
9 it is a restless demon, never at peace, but always having its home
among factions.
10 Refrain from it therefore, and thou shalt have success at all times
with all men.
11 But clothe thyself in reverence, wherein is no evil stumbling-block,
but all things are smooth and gladsome.
12 Work that which is good,
13 and of thy labours, which God giveth thee, give to all that are in
want freely, not questioning to whom thou shall give, and to whom
thou shall not give.
14 Give to all;
15 for to all God desireth that there should be given of His own
bounties.
16 They then that receive shall render an account to God why they
received it, and to what end;
17 for they that receive in distress shall not be judged, but they that
receive by false pretence shall pay the penalty.
18 He then that giveth is guiltless;
19 for as he received from the Lord the ministration to perform it, he
hath performed it in sincerity, by making no distinction to whom to
give or not to give.
20 This ministration then, when sincerely performed, becomes
glorious in the sight of God.
21 He therefore that ministereth thus sincerely shall live unto God.
22 Therefore keep this commandment, as I have told thee, that thine
own repentance and that of thy household may be found to be
sincere, and [thy] heart pure and undefiled.
Shepherd 34
1 MANDATE THE THIRD.
2 Again he saith to me;510
Codex Sinaiticus:
3 Love truth, and let nothing but truth proceed out of thy mouth, that
the Spirit which God made to dwell in this flesh, may be found true in
the sight of all men;
4 and thus shall the Lord, Who dwelleth in thee, be glorified;
5 for the Lord is true in every word, and with Him there is no
falsehood.
6 They therefore that speak lies set the Lord at nought, and become
robbers of the Lord, for they do not deliver up to Him the deposit
which they received.
7 For they received of Him a spirit free from lies.
8 This if they shall return a lying spirit, they have defiled the
commandment of the Lord and have become robbers.
9 When then I heard these things, I wept bitterly.
10 But seeing me weep he saith, Why weepest thou ?
11 Because, Sir, say I, I know not if I can be saved.
12 Why so?
13 saith he.
14 Because, Sir, I say, never in my life spake I a true word, but I
always lived deceitfully with all men and dressed up my falsehood as
truth before all men;
15 and no man ever contradicted me, but confidence was placed in
my word.
16 How then, Sir, say I, can I live, seeing that I have done these
things?
17 Your supposition, he saith, is right and true,
18 for it behoved thee as a servant of God to walk in truth, and no
complicity with evil should abide with the Spirit of truth, nor bring
grief to the Spirit which is holy and true.
19 Never, Sir, say I, heard I clearly words such as these.
20 Now then, saith he, thou hearest.
21 Guard them, that the former falsehoods also which thou spakest in
thy business affairs may themselves become credible, now that these
are found true;
22 for they too can become trustworthy.
23 If thou keep these things,
24 and from henceforward speak nothing but truth,
25 thou shalt be able to secure life for thyself And whosoever shall
hear this command, and abstain from falsehood, that most
pernicious habit, shall live unto God.
Shepherd 35
1 MANDATE THE FOURTH.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
511
2 I charge thee, saith he, to keep purity,
3 and let not a thought enter into thy heart concerning another’s
wife, or concerning fornication or concerning any such like evil
deeds;
4 for in so doing thou committest a great sin.
5 But remember thine own wife always, and thou shalt never go
wrong.
6 For should this desire enter into thine heart, thou wilt go wrong,
and should any other as evil as this, thou committest sit,.
7 For this desire in a servant of God is a great sin;
8 and if any man doeth this evil deed, he worketh out death for
himself Look to it therefore.
9 Abstain from this desire;
10 for, Mere holiness dwelleth, there lawlessness ought not to enter
into the heart of a righteous man.
11 I say to him, Sir, permit me to ask thee a few more questions.
12 Say on, saith he.
13 Sir, say I, if a man who has a wife that is faithful in the Lord detect
her in adultery, doth the husband sin in living with her?
14 So long as he is ignorant, saith he, he sinneth not;
15 but if the husband know of her sin, and the wife repent not, but
continue in her fornication, and her husband live with her, he makes
himself responsible for her sin and an accomplice in her adultery.
16 What then, Sir, say I, shall the husband do, if the wife continue in
this case?
17 Let him divorce her, saith he, and let the husband abide alone:
18 but if after divorcing his wife he shall marry another, he likewise
committeth adultery.
19 If then, Sir, say I, after the wife is divorced, she repent and desire
to return to her own husband, shall she not be received?
20 Certainly, saith he, if the husband receiveth her not, he sinneth
and bringeth great sin upon himself;
21 nay, one who hath sinned and repented must be received, yet not
often;
22 for there is but one repentance for the servants of God.
23 For the sake of her repentance therefore the husband ought not to
marry.
24 This is the manner of acting enjoined on husband and wife.
25 Not only, saith he, is it adultery, if a man pollute his flesh, but
whosoever doeth things like unto the heathen committeth adultery.
26 If therefore in such deeds as these likewise a man continue and
repent not, keep away from him, and live not with him.
27 Otherwise, thou also art a partaker of his sin.512
Codex Sinaiticus:
28 For this cause ye were enjoined to remain single, whether
husband or wife;
29 for in such cases repentance is possible.
30 I, said he, am not giving an excuse that this matter should be
concluded thus, but to the end that the sinner should sin no more.
31 But as concerning his former sin, there is One who is able to give
healing;
Shepherd 36
1 I asked him again, saying, Seeing that the Lord held me worthy that
thou shouldest always dwell with me, suffer me still to made dense
by my former deeds.
2 Make me to understand, for I am very foolish, and I apprehend
absolutely nothing.
3 He answered and said unto me, I, saith he, preside over
repentance, and I give understanding to all who repent.
4 Nay, thinkest thou not, saith he, that this very act of repentance is
understanding?
5 To repent is great understanding, saith he.
6 For the man that hath sinned understandeth that he hath done evil
before the Lord,
7 and the deed which he hath done entereth into his heart, and he
repenteth, and doeth no more evil, but doeth good lavishly, and
humbleth his own soul and putteth it to torture because it sinned.
8 Thou seest then that repentance is great understanding.
9 It is on this account therefore, Sir, say I, that I enquire everything
accurately of thee;
10 first, because I am a sinner;
11 secondly, because I know not what deeds I must do that I may live,
for my sins are many and various.
12 Thou shalt live, saith he, if thou keep my commandments and
walk in them;
Shepherd 37
1 I will still proceed, Sir, say I, to ask a further question.
2 Speak on, saith he.
3 I have heard, Sir, say I, from took place when we went down into
the water and obtained remission of our former sins.
4 He saith to me;
5 Thou hast well heard;
6 for so it is.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
513
7 For he that hath received remission of sins ought no longer to sin,
but to dwell in purity.
8 But, since thou enquirest all things accurately,
9 I will declare unto thee this also, so as to give no excuse to those
who shall hereafter believe or those who have already believed, on
the Lord.
10 For they that have already believed, or shall hereafter believe,
have not repentance for sins, but have only remission of their former
sins.
11 To those then that were called before these days the Lord has
appointed repentance.
12 For the Lord, being a discerner of hearts and foreknowing all
things,
13 perceived the weakness of men and the manifold wiles of the devil,
how that he will be doing some mischief to the servants of God, and
will deal wickedly with them.
14 The Lord then, being very compassionate, had pity on His
handiwork, and appointeth this (opportunity of) repentance, and to
me was given the authority over this repentance.
15 But I say unto you, saith he, if after this great and holy calling any
one, being tempted of the devil, shall commit sin, he hath only one
(opportunity of) repentance.
16 But if he sin off-hand and repent, repentance is unprofitable for
such a man;
17 for he shall live with difficulty.
18 I say unto him, I was quickened into life again, when I heard these
things from thee so precisely.
19 For I know that, if I shall add no more to my sins, I shall be saved.
Shepherd 38
1 I asked him again, saying, Sir, since once thou dost bear with me,
declare unto me this further matter also.
2 Say on, saith and one of them marry, doth the one that marrieth
sin?
3 He sinneth not, saith he, but if he remain single, he investeth
himself with more exceeding honour and with great glory before the
Lord;
4 yet even if he should marry, he sinneth not.
5 Preserve purity and holiness therefore, and thou shalt live unto
God.
6 All these things, which I speak and shall hereafter speak unto thee,
guard from this time forward, from the day when thou vast
committed unto me, and I will dwell in thy house.514
Codex Sinaiticus:
7 But for thy former transgressions there shall be remission, if thou
keepest my commandments.
Shepherd 39
1 MANDATE THE FIFTH.
2 thou shalt have the mastery over all evil deeds, and shalt work all
righteousness.
3 For if thou art long-suffering,
4 the Holy Spirit that abideth in thee shall be pure,
5 not being darkened by another evil spirit,
6 but dwelling in a large room shall rejoice and be glad with the
vessel in which he dwelleth, and shall serve God with much
cheerfulness, having prosperity in himself.
7 But if any angry temper approach, forthwith the Holy Spirit, being
delicate, is straitened, not having [the) place clear, and seeketh to
retire from the place;
8 for he is being choked by the evil spirit, and has no room to
minister unto the Lord, as he desireth, being polluted by angry
temper.
9 For the Lord dwelleth in long-suffering, but the devil in angry
temper.
10 Thus that both the spirits then should be dwelling together is
inconvenient and evil for that man in whom they dwell.
11 For if you take a little wormwood, and pour it into a jar of honey, is
not the whole of the honey spoiled, and all that honey ruined by a
very small quantity of wormwood?
12 For it destroyeth the sweetness of the honey, and it no longer hath
the same attraction for the owner, because it is rendered bitter and
hath lost its use.
13 But if the wormwood be not put into the honey, the honey is found
sweet and becomes useful to its owner.
14 Thou seest [then) that long-suffering is very sweet, beyond the
sweetness of honey, and is useful to the Lord, and He dwelleth in it.
15 But angry temper is bitter and useless.
16 If then angry temper be mixed with long-suffering, long-suffering
is polluted and the mans intercession is no longer useful to God.
17 I would fain know, Sir, say I, the working of angry temper, that I
may guard myself from it.
18 Yea, verily, saith he, if thou guard not thyself from it-thou and thy
family-thou hast lost all thy hope.
19 But guard thyself from it;
20 for I am with thee.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
515
21 Yea, and all men shall hold aloof from it, as many as have
repenteth with their whole heart.
22 For I will be with them and will preserve them;
Shepherd 40
1 Hear now, saith he, the working of angry temper, how evil it is,
2 and how it subverteth the servants of God by its own working, lead
astray them that are full in the faith, nor can it work upon them,
because the power of the Lord is with them;
3 but them that are empty and double-minded it leadeth astray.
4 For when it seeth such men in prosperity it insinuates itself into the
heart of the man,
5 and for no cause whatever the man or the woman is embittered on
account of worldly matters,
6 either about meats, or some triviality, or about some friend, or
about giving or receiving, or about follies of this kind.
7 For all these things are foolish and vain and senseless and
inexpedient for the servants of God.
8 But long-suffering is great and strong,
9 and has a mighty and vigorous power, and is prosperous in great
enlargement, gladsome, exultant, free from care, glorifying the Lord
at every season, having no bitterness in itself, remaining always
gentle and tranquil.
10 This long-suffering therefore dwelleth with those whose faith is
perfect.
11 But angry temper is in the first place foolish, fickle and senseless;
12 then from foolishness is engendered bitterness, and from
bitterness wrath, and from wrath anger, and from anger spite;
13 then spite being composed of all these evil elements becometh a
great sin and incurable.
14 For when all these spirits dwell in one vessel, where the Holy
Spirit also dwelleth, that vessel cannot contain them, but
overfloweth.
15 The delicate spirit therefore,
16 as not being accustomed to dwell with-an evil spirit nor with
harshness, departeth from a man of that kind, and seeketh to dwell
with gentleness and tranquility.
17 Then, when it hath removed from that man, in whom it dwells,
18 that man becometh emptied of the righteous spirit,
19 and henceforward, being filled with the evil spirits, he is unstable
in all his actions,
20 being dragged about hither and thither by the evil spirits, and is
altogether blinded and bereft of his good intent.516
Codex Sinaiticus:
21 Thus then it happeneth to all persons of angry temper.
22 Refrain therefore from angry temper, the most evil of evil spirits.
23 But clothe thyself in long-suffering, and resist angry temper and
bitterness, and thou shalt be found in company with the holiness
which is beloved of the Lord.
24 See then that thou never neglect this commandment;
25 for if thou master this commandment, thou shalt be able likewise
to keep the remaining commandments, which I am about to give
thee.
26 Be strong in them and endowed with power;
Shepherd 41
1 MANDATE THE SIXTH.
2 I charged thee, saith he,
3 in my first commandment to guard saith he, I wish to show thee
their powers also, that thou mayest understand what is the power
and effect of each one of them.
4 For their effects are twofold.
5 Now they are prescribed alike to the righteous and the unrighteous.
6 Do thou therefore trust righteousness, but trust not
unrighteousness;
7 for the way of righteousness is straight, but the way of
unrighteousness is crooked.
8 But walk thou in the straight [and level] path, and leave the
crooked one alone.
9 For the crooked way has no tracks, but only pathlessness and many
stumbling-stones, and is rough and thorny.
10 So it is therefore harmful to those who walk in it.
11 But those who walk in the straight way walk on the level and
without stumbling :
12 for it is neither rough nor thorny.
13 Thou seest then that it is more expedient to walk in this way.
14 I am pleased, Sir, say I, to walk in this way.
Shepherd 42
1 Hear now, saith he, concerning faith.
2 There are two then, Sir, say I, shall I know their workings, seeing
that both angels dwell with me?
3 Hear, saith he, and understand their workings.
4 The angel of righteousness is delicate and bashful and gentle and
tranquil.
5 When then this one enters into thy heart,The H. T. Anderson New Testament
517
6 forthwith he speaketh with thee of righteousness, of purity, of
holiness, and of contentment, of every righteous deed and of every
glorious virtue.
7 When all these things enter into thy heart, know that the angel of
righteousness is with thee.
8 [These then are the works of the angel of righteousness.]
9 Trust him therefore and his works.
10 Now see the works of the angel of wickedness also.
11 First of all, he is quick-tempered and bitter and senseless, and his
works are evil, overthrowing the servants of God.
12 Whenever then he entereth into thy heart, know him by his works.
13 How I shall discern him, Sir, I reply, I know not.
14 Listen, saith he.
15 When a fit of angry temper or bitterness comes upon thee, know
that he is in thee.
16 Then the desire of much business and the costliness of many
viands and drinking bouts and of many drunken fits and of various
luxuries which are unseemly,
17 and the desire of women, and avarice, and haughtiness and
boastfulness,
18 and whatsoever things are akin and like to these-when then these
things enter into thy heart, know that the angel of wickedness is with
thee.
19 Do thou therefore, recognising his works, stand aloof from him,
and trust him in nothing, for his works are evil and inexpedient for
the servants of God.
20 Here then thou hast the workings of both the angels.
21 Understand them, and trust the angel of righteousness.
22 But from the angel of wickedness stand aloof, for his teaching is
evil in every matter;
23 for though one be a man of faith, and the desire of this angel enter
into his heart, that man, or that woman, must commit some sin.
24 And if again a man or a woman be exceedingly wicked, and the
works of the angel of righteousness come into that mans heart, he
must of necessity do something good.
25 Thou seest then, saith he, that it is good to follow the angel of
righteousness, and to bid farewell to the angel of wickedness.
26 This commandment declareth what concerneth faith,, that thou
mayest trust the works of the angel of righteousness, and doing them
mayest live unto God.
27 But believe that the works of the angel of wickedness are difficult;
Shepherd 43518
Codex Sinaiticus:
1 MANDATE THE SEVENTH.
2 Fear the Lord, saith he, and keep His commandments.
3 So deed, and thy doing shall be incomparable.
4 For whilst thou fearest the Lord, thou shalt do all things well.
5 But this is the fear wherewith thou oughtest to be afraid, and thou
shalt be saved.
6 But fear not the devil;
7 for, if thou fear the Lord, thou shalt be master over the devil, for
there is no power in him.
8 [For] in whom is no power, neither is there fear of him;
9 but in whom power is glorious, of him is fear likewise.
10 For every one that hath power hath fear, whereas he that hath no
power is despised of all.
11 But fear thou the works of the devil, for they are evil.
12 While then thou fearest the Lord, thou wilt fear the works of the
devil, and wilt not do them, but abstain from them.
13 Fear therefore is of two kinds.
14 If thou desire to do evil, fear the Lord, and thou shalt not do it.
15 If again thou desire to do good, fear the Lord and thou shalt do it.
16 Therefore the fear of the Lord is powerful and great and glorious.
17 Fear the Lord then, and thou shalt live unto Him;
18 yea, and as many of them that keep His commandments as shall
fear Him, shall live unto God.
19 Wherefore, Sir, say I, didst thou say concerning those that keep
His commandments, “They shall live unto God”?
20 Because, saith he, every creature feareth the Lord, but not every
one keepeth His commandments.
21 Those then that fear Him and keep His commandments, they have
life unto God;
Shepherd 44
1 MANDATE THE EIGHTH.
2 I told thee, saith he, that the creatures of God are twofold;
3 be temperate, but in other things it is not right.
4 Make known unto me, Sir, say I, in what things it is right to be
temperate, and in what things it is not right.
5 Listen, saith he.
6 Be temperate as to what is evil, and do it not;
7 but be not temperate as to what is good, but do it.
8 For if thou be temperate as to what is good, so as not to do it, thou
committest a great sin;The H. T. Anderson New Testament
519
9 but if thou be temperate as to what is evil, so as not to do it, thou
doest great righteousness.
10 Be temperate therefore in abstaining from all wickedness, and do
that which is good.
11 What kinds of wickedness, Sir, say I, are they from which we must
be temperate and abstain?
12 Listen, saith he;
13 from adultery and fornication,
14 from the lawlessness of drunkenness, from wicked luxury,
15 from many viands and the costliness of riches, and vaunting and
haughtiness and pride, and from falsehood and evil-speaking and
hypocrisy, malice and all blasphemy.
16 These works are the most wicked of all in the life of men.
17 From these works therefore the servant of God must be temperate
and abstain;
18 for he that is not temperate so as to abstain from these cannot live
unto God.
19 Listen then to what follows upon these.
20 Why, are there still other evil deeds, Sir?
21 say I.
22 Aye, saith he, there are many, from which the servant of God must
be temperate and abstain;
23 theft, falsehood, deprivation, false witness, avarice, evil desire,
deceit, vain-glory, boastfulness, and whatsoever things are like unto
these.
24 Thinkest thou not that these things are wrong, yea, very wrong,
[saith he,] for the servants of God?
25 In all these things he that serveth God must exercise temperance.
26 Be thou temperate, therefore, and refrain from all these things,
that thou mayest live unto God, and be enrolled among those who
exercise self-restraint in them.
27 These then are the things from which thou shouldest restrain
thyself Now hear, saith he, the things, in which thou shouldest not
exercise self-restraint, but do them.
28 Exercise no self-restraint in that which is good, but do it.
29 Sir, say I, show me the power of the good also, that I may walk in
them and serve them, that doing them it may be possible for me to be
saved.
30 Hear, saith he, the works of the good likewise, which thou must
do, and towards which thou must exercise no self-restraint.
31 First of all, there is faith, fear of the Lord, love, concord, words of
righteousness, truth, patience;
32 nothing is better than these it, the life of men.520
Codex Sinaiticus:
33 If a man keep these, and exercise not self-restraint from them, he
becomes blessed in his life.
34 Hear now what follow upon these;
35 to minister to widows, to visit the orphans and the needy,
36 to ransom the servants of God from their afflictions,
37 to be hospitable (for in hospitality benevolence from time to time
has a place),
38 to resist no man, to be tranquil, to show yourself more submissive
than all men,
39 to reverence the aged, to practise righteousness, to observe
brotherly feeling,
40 to endure injury, to be long-suffering, to bear no grudge,
41 to exhort those who are sick at soul, not to cast away those that
have stumbled from the faith,
42 but to convert them and to put courage into them, to reprove
sinners, not to oppress debtors and indigent persons, and whatsoever
actions are like these.
43 Do these things, saith he, seem to thee to be good?
44 Why, what, Sir, say I, can be better than these ?
45 Then walk in them, saith he, and abstain not from them, and thou
shalt live unto God.
46 Keep this commandment therefore.
47 If thou do good and abstain not from it, thou shalt live unto God;
48 yea, and all shall live unto God who act so.
49 And again if thou do not evil, and abstain from it, thou shalt live
unto God;
50 yea, and all shall live unto God, who shall keep these
commandments, and walk in them.
Shepherd 45
1 MANDATE THE NINTH.
2 He saith to me;
3 Remove from thyself a doubtful mind and doubt not at all whether
to ask of God, saying within thyself, “ How can I ask a thing of the
Lord and receive it, seeing that I have committed so many sins
against Him?”
4 Reason not thus, but turn to the Lord with thy whole heart,
5 and ask of Him, nothing wavering, and thou shalt know His
exceeding compassion, that He will surely not abandon thee, but will
fulfil the petition of thy soul.
6 For God is not as men who bear a grudge, but Himself is without
malice and hath compassion on His creatures.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
521
7 Do thou therefore cleanse thy heart from all the vanities of this life,
and from the things mentioned before;
8 and ask of the Lord, and thou shalt receive all things, and shalt lack
nothing of all thy petitions, if thou ask of the Lord nothing wavering.
9 But if thou waver in thy heart, thou shalt surely receive none of thy
petitions.
10 For they that waver towards God, these are the doubtful-minded,
and they never obtain any of their petitions.
11 But they that are complete in the faith make all their petitions
trusting in the Lord, and they receive, because they ask without
wavering, nothing doubting;
12 for every doubtful-minded man, if he repent not, shall hardly be
saved.
13 Cleanse therefore thy heart from doubtful-mindedness, and put on
faith, for it is strong, and trust God that thou wilt receive all thy
petitions which thou askest;
14 and if after asking anything of the Lord, thou receive thy petition
somewhat tardily, be not of doubtful mind because thou didst not
receive the petition of thy soul at once.
15 For assuredly it is by reason of some temptation or some
transgression, of which thou art ignorant, that thou receivest thy
petition so tardily.
16 Do thou therefore cease not to make thy souls petition, and thou
shalt receive it.
17 But if thou grow weary, and doubt as thou askest, blame thyself
and not Him that giveth unto thee.
18 See to this doubtful-mindedness;
19 for it is evil and senseless, and uprooteth many from the faith, yea,
even very faithful and strong men.
20 For indeed this doubtful-mindedness is a daughter of the devil,
and worketh great wickedness against the servants of God.
21 Therefore despise doubtful-mindedness and gain the mastery over
it in everything, clothing thyself with faith which is strong and
powerful.
22 For faith promiseth all things, accomplisheth all things;
23 but doubtful-mindedness, as having no confidence in itself, fails
in all the works which it doeth.
24 Thou seest then, saith he, that faith is from above from the Lord,
and hath great power;
25 but doubtful-mindedness as an earthly spirit from the devil, and
hath no power.
26 Do thou therefore serve that faith which hath power, and hold
aloof from the doubtful-mindedness which hath no power;
27 and thou shalt live unto God;522
Codex Sinaiticus:
28 yea, and all those shall live unto God who are so minded.
Shepherd 46
1 MANDATE THE TENTH.
2 Put away sorrow from thyself, saith he, for she is the sister of
doubtful-mindedness and of angry temper.
3 How, Sir, say I, is she the sister of these?
4 For angry temper seems to me to be one thing, doubtful-
mindedness another, sorrow another.
5 Thou art a foolish fellow, saith he,
6 [and] perceivest not that sorrow is more evil than all the spirits,
7 and is most fatal to the servants of God, and beyond all the spirits
destroys a man, and crushes out the Holy Spirit, and yet again saves
it.
8 I, Sir, say I, am without understanding, and I understand not these
parables.
9 For how it can crush out and again save, I do not comprehend.
10 Listen, saith he.
11 Those who have never investigated concerning the truth,
12 nor enquired concerning the deity,
13 but have merely believed,
14 and have been mixed up in business affairs and riches and
heathen friendships,
15 and many other affairs of this world-as many, I say, as devote
themselves to these things, comprehend not the parables of the deity;
16 for they are darkened by these actions, and are corrupted and
become barren.
17 As good vineyards,
18 when they are treated with neglect, are made barren by the thorns
and weeds of various kinds,
19 so men who after they have believed fall into these many
occupations which were mentioned before, lose their understanding
and comprehend nothing at all concerning righteousness;
20 for if they hear concerning the deity and truth, their mind is
absorbed in their occupations, and they perceive nothing at all.
21 But they that have the fear of God,
22 and investigate concerning deity and truth, and direct their heart
towards the Lord, perceive and understand everything that is said to
them more quickly,
23 because they have the fear of the Lord in themselves;
24 for where the Lord dwelleth, there too is great understanding.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
523
25 Cleave therefore unto the Lord, and thou shalt understand and
perceive all things.
Shepherd 47
1 Hear now, senseless man, saith he, how sorrow crusheth out the
Holy Spirit, and again saveth it.
2 When the man of doubtful mind sets his hand to any action, and
fails in it owing to his doubtful-mindedness, grief at this entereth
into the man, and grieveth the Holy Spirit, and crusheth it out.
3 Then again when angry temper cleaveth to a man concerning any
matter,
4 and he is much embittered, again sorrow entereth into the heart of
the man that was ill-tempered, and he is grieved at the deed which he
hath done, and repenteth that he did evil.
5 This sadness therefore seemeth to bring salvation, because he
repented at having done the evil.
6 So both the operations sadden the Spirit;
7 first, the doubtful mind saddens the Spirit, because it succeeded
not in its business, and the angry temper again, because it did what
was evil.
8 Thus both are saddening to the Holy Spirit, the doubtful mind and
the angry temper.
9 Put away therefore from thyself sadness, and afflict not the Holy
Spirit that dwelleth in thee, lest haply He intercede with God [against
thee], and depart from thee.
10 For the Spirit of God, that was given unto this flesh, endureth not
sadness neither constraint.
Shepherd 48
1 Therefore clothe thyself in cheerfulness, which hath favour with
God always, and is acceptable to Him, and rejoice in it.
2 For every cheerful man worketh good, and thinketh good, and
despiseth sadness;
3 but the sad man is always committing sin.
4 In the first place he committeth sin, because he grieveth the Holy
Spirit, which was given to the man being a cheerful spirit;
5 and in the second place, by grieving the Holy Spirit he doeth
lawlessness, in that he doth not intercede with neither confess unto
God.
6 For the intercession of a sad man hath never at any time power to
ascend to the altar of God.
7 Wherefore, say I, doth not the intercession of him that is saddened
ascend to the altar?524
Codex Sinaiticus:
8 Because, saith he, sadness is seated at his heart.
9 Thus sadness mingled with the intercession doth not suffer the
intercession to ascend pure to the altar.
10 For as vinegar when mingled with vine in the same (vessel) hath
not the same pleasant taste, so likewise sadness mingled with the
Holy Spirit hath not the same intercession.
11 Therefore cleanse thyself from this wicked sadness, and thou shalt
live unto God;
12 yea, and all they shall live unto God, who shall cast away sadness
from themselves and clothe themselves in all cheerfulness.
Shepherd 49
1 MANDATE THE ELEVENTH.
2 He shewed me men seated on a couch, and another man seated on
a chair.
3 And he saith to me, Seest thou those that are seated on the couch ?
4 I see them, Sir, say I.
5 These, saith he, are faithful,
6 but he that sitteth on the chair is a false prophet who destroyeth the
mind of the servants of God-I mean, of the doubtful-minded, not of
the faithful.
7 These doubtful-minded ones then come to him as to a soothsayer
and enquire of him what shall befall them.
8 And he, the false prophet, having no power of a divine Spirit in
himself, speaketh with them according to their enquiries [and
according to the lusts of their wickedness],
9 and filleth their souls as they themselves wish.
10 For being empty himself he giveth empty answers to empty
enquirers;
11 for whatever enquiry may be made of him, he answereth according
to the emptiness of the man.
12 But he speaketh also some true words for the devil filleth him with
his own spirit, if so be he shall be able to break down some of the
righteous.
13 So many therefore as are strong in the faith of the Lord, clothed
with the truth, cleave not to such spirits, but hold aloof from them;
14 but as many as are doubters and frequently change their minds,
practise soothsaying like the Gentiles, and bring upon themselves
greater sin by their idolatries.
15 For he that consulteth a false prophet on any matter is an idolater
and emptied of the truth, and senseless.
16 For no Spirit given of God needeth to be consulted;The H. T. Anderson New Testament
525
17 but, having the power of deity, speaketh all things of itself, because
it is from above, even from the power of the divine Spirit.
18 But the spirit which is consulted, and speaketh according to the
desires of men, is earthly and fickle, having no power;
19 and it speaketh not at all, unless it be consulted.
20 How then, Sir, say I, shall a man know who of them is a prophet,
and who a false prophet?
21 Hear, saith he, concerning both the prophets;
22 and, as I shall tell thee, so shalt thou test the prophet and the false
prophet.
23 By his life test the man that hath the divine Spirit.
24 In the first place, he that hath the [divine] Spirit, which is from
above,
25 is gentle and tranquil and humble-minded,
26 and abstaineth from all wickedness and vain desire of this present
world,
27 and holdeth himself inferior to all men, and giveth no answer to
any man when enquired of, nor speaketh in solitude (for neither doth
the Holy Spirit speak when a man wisheth Him to speak);
28 but the man speaketh then when God wisheth him to speak.
29 When then the man who hath the divine Spirit cometh into an
assembly of righteous men, who have faith in a divine Spirit,
30 and intercession is made to God by the gathering of those men,
31 then the angel of the prophetic spirit, who is attached to him,
filleth the man, and the man, being filled with the Holy Spirit,
speaketh to the multitude, according as the Lord willeth.
32 In this way then the Spirit of the deity shall be manifest.
33 This then is the greatness of the power as touching the Spirit of
the deity of the Lord.
34 Hear now, saith he, concerning the earthly and vain spirit, which
hath no power but is foolish.
35 In, the first place, that man who seemeth to have a spirit exalteth
himself,
36 and desireth to have a chief place,
37 and straight-way he is impudent and shameless and talkative and
conversant in many luxuries and in many other deceits, and receiveth
money for his prophesying, and if he receiveth not, he prophesieth
not.
38 Now can a divine Spirit receive money and prophesy?
39 It is not possible for a prophet of God to do this, but the spirit of
such prophets is earthly.
40 In the next place, it never approacheth an assembly of righteous
men;526
Codex Sinaiticus:
41 but avoideth them, and cleaveth to the doubtful-minded and
empty,
42 and prophesieth to them in corners, and deceiveth them, speaking
all things in emptiness to gratify their desires;
43 for they too are empty whom it answereth.
44 For the empty vessel placed together with the empty is not
broken, but they agree one with the other.
45 But when he comes into an assembly full of righteous men who
have a Spirit of deity,
46 and intercession is made from them,
47 that man is emptied, an(l the earthly spirit fleeth from him, in
fear, and that man is struck dumb and is altogether broken in pieces,
being unable to utter a word.
48 For, if you pack wine or oil into a closet, and place an empty vessel
among them, and again desire to unpack the closet,
49 the vessel which you placed there empty, empty in like manner
you will find it.
50 Thus also the empty prophets, whenever they come unto the
spirits of righteous men, are found just such as they came.
51 I have given thee the life of both kinds of prophets.
52 Therefore test, by his life and his works, the man who says that he
is moved by the Spirit.
53 But do thou trust the Spirit that cometh from God, and hath
power;
54 but in the earthly and empty spirit put no trust at all;
55 for in it there is no power, for it cometh from the devil.
56 Listen [then] to the parable which I shall tell thee.
57 Take a stone, and throw it up to heaven-see if thou canst reach it;
58 or again, take a squirt of water, and squirt it up to heaven-see if
thou canst bore through the heaven.
59 How, Sir, say I, can these things be?
60 For both these things which thou hast mentioned are beyond our
power.
61 Well then, saith he, just as these things are beyond our power, so
likewise the earthly spirits have no power and are feeble.
62 Now take the power which cometh from above.
63 The hail is a very small grain, and yet, when it falleth on a mans
head, what pain it causeth! Or again, take a drop which falls on the
ground from the tiles, and bores through the stone.
Shepherd 50
1 MANDATE THE TWELFTH.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
527
2 He saith to me;
3 Remove from thyself all evil desire, and clothe thyself in the desire
which is good and holy;
4 for clothed with this desire thou shalt hate the evil desire, and shalt
bridle and direct it as thou wilt.
5 For the evil desire is wild, and only tamed with difficulty;
6 for it is terrible, and by its wildness is very costly to men;
7 more especially if a servant of God get entangled in it, and have no
understanding, he is put to fearful costs by it.
8 But it is costly to such men as are not clothed in the good desire,
but are mixed up with this life.
9 These men then it hands over to death.
10 Of what sort, Sir, say I, are the works of the evil desire, which
hand over men to death?
11 Make them known to me, that I may hold aloof from them.
12 Listen, [saith he,] through what works the evil desire bringeth
death to the servants of God.
Shepherd 51
1 Before all is desire for the wife or husband of another, and for
extravagance of wealth, and for many needless dainties, and for
drinks and other luxuries, many and foolish.
2 For every luxury is foolish and vain for the servants of God.
3 These desires then are evil, and bring death to the servants of God.
4 For this evil desire is a daughter of the devil.
5 Ye must, therefore, abstain from the evil desires, that so abstaining
ye may live unto God.
6 But as many as are mastered by them, and resist them not, are
done to death utterly;
7 for these desires are deadly.
8 But do thou clothe thyself in the desire of righteousness, and,
having armed thyself with the fear of the Lord, resist them.
9 For the fear of God dwelleth in the good desire.
10 If the evil desire shall see thee armed with the fear of God and
resisting itself, it shall flee far from thee, and shall no more be seen of
thee, being in fear of thine arms.
11 Do thou therefore, when thou art crowned for thy victory over it,
come to the desire of righteousness,
12 and deliver to her the victors prize which thou hast received, and
serve her, according as she herself desireth.
Shepherd 52528
Codex Sinaiticus:
1 I would fain know, Sir, say I, in what ways I ought to serve the and
the fear of the Lord, faith and gentleness, and as many good deeds as
are like these.
2 Practising these thou shalt be well-pleasing as a servant of God,
and shalt live unto Him;
Shepherd 53
1 So he completed the twelve commandments, and he saith to me;
2 Thou hast these commandments;
3 walk in them, and exhort thy hearers that their ministration, which
I give thee, fulfil thou with all diligence to the end, and thou shalt
effect much.
4 For thou shalt find favour among those who are about to repent,
and they shall obey thy words.
Shepherd 54
1 I say to him;
2 Sir, these commandments are great and beautiful and glorious, and
are able to gladden the heart of the man who is able to man, for they
are very hard.
3 He answered and said unto me;
4 If thou set it before thyself that they can be kept, thou wilt easily
keep them, and they will not be hard;
5 but if it once enter into thy heart that they cannot be kept by a man,
thou wilt not keep them.
6 But now I say unto thee;
7 if thou keep then, not, but neglect them, thou shalt not have
salvation, neither thy children nor thy household, since thou hast
already pronounced judgment against thyself that these
commandments cannot be kept by a man.
Shepherd 55
1 And these things he said to me very angrily, so that I was
confounded, and feared him exceedingly;
2 for his form was changed, so that a man could not endure his
anger.
3 And when he saw that I was altogether disturbed and confounded,
he began to speak more kindly [and cheerfully] to me, and he saith;
4 Foolish fellow, void of understanding and of doubtful mind,
5 perceivest thou not the glory of God, how great and mighty and
marvelous it is,The H. T. Anderson New Testament
529
6 how that He created the world for mans sake, and subjected all His
creation to man, and gave all authority to him, that he should be
master over all things under the heaven?
7 If then, [he saith,] man is lord of all the creatures of God and
mastereth all things, cannot he also master these commandments?
8 Aye, saith he, the man that hath the Lord in his heart can master
[all things and] all these commandments.
9 But they that have the Lord on their lips, while their heart is
hardened, and are far from the Lord, to them these commandments
are hard and inaccessible.
10 Therefore do ye, who are empty and fickle in the faith, set your
Lord in your heart, and ye shall perceive that nothing is easier than
these commandments, nor sweeter, nor more gentle.
11 Be ye converted, ye that walk after the commandments of devil,
(the commandments which are so) difficult and bitter and wild and
riotous;
12 and fear not the devil, for there is no power in him against you.
13 For I will be with you, I, the angel of repentance, who have the
mastery over him.
14 The devil hath fear alone, but his fear hath no force.
Shepherd 56
1 I say to him, Sir, listen to a few words from me.
2 Say what thou wilt, saith he.
3 Man, Sir, I say, is eager to keep the commandments of
strengthened in His commandments, and be subject to them;
4 but the devil is hard and overmastereth them.
5 He cannot, saith he, overmaster the servants of God, who set their
hope on Him with their whole heart.
6 The devil can wrestle with them, but he cannot overthrow them.
7 If then ye resist him, he will be vanquished, and will flee from you
disgraced.
8 But as many, saith he, as are utterly empty, fear the devil as if he
had power.
9 When a man has filled amply sufficient jars with good wine, and
among these jars a few are quite empty, he comes to the jars, and
does not examine the full ones, for he knows that they are full;
10 but he examineth the empty ones, fearing lest they have turned
sour.
11 For empty jars soon turn sour, and the taste of the wine is spoilt.
12 So also the devil cometh to all the servants of Cod tempting them.530
Codex Sinaiticus:
13 As many then as are complete in the faith, oppose him mightily,
and he departeth from them, not having a place where he can find an
entrance.
14 So he cometh next to the empty ones, and finding a place goeth
into them, and further he doeth what he willeth in them, and they
become submissive slaves to him.
Shepherd 57
1 But I, the angel of repentance, say unto you;
2 Fear not the devil;
3 for I was sent, saith he, to be with you who repent with your whole
heart, and to strengthen you in the faith.
4 Believe, therefore, on God, ye who by reason of your sins have
despaired of your life, and are adding to your sins, and weighing
down your life;
5 for if ye turn unto the Lord with your whole heart,
6 and work righteousness the remaining days of your life, and serve
Him rightly according to His will, He will give healing to your former
sins, and ye shall have power to master the works of the devil.
7 But of the threatening of the devil fear not at all;
8 for he is unstrung, like the sinews of a dead man.
9 Hear me therefore, and fear Him, Who is able to do all things, to
save and to destroy, and observe these commandments, and ye shall
live unto God.
10 I say to him, Sir, now am I strengthened in all the ordinances of
the Lord, because thou art with me;
11 and I know that thou wilt crush all the power of the devil, and we
shall be masters over him, and shall prevail over all his works.
12 And I hope, Sir, that I am now able to keep these commandments
which thou hast commanded, the Lord enabling me.
13 Thou shalt keep them, saith he, if thy heart be found pure with the
Lord;
Shepherd 58
1 PARABLES WHICH HE SPAKE WITH ME.
2 He saith to me;
3 Ye know that ye, who far from this city.
4 If then ye know your city, in which ye shall dwell, why do ye here
prepare fields and expensive displays and buildings and dwelling-
chambers which are superfluous?
5 He, therefore, that prepareth these things for this city does not
purpose to return to his own city.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
531
6 O foolish and double-minded and miserable man, perceivest thou
not that all these things are foreign, and are under the power of
another?
7 For the lord of this city shall say, “I do not wish thee to dwell in my
city;
8 go forth from this city, for thou dost not conform to my laws.”
9 Thou, therefore, who hast fields and dwellings and many other
possessions,
10 when thou art cast out by him, what wilt thou do with thy field
and thy house and all the other things that thou preparedst for
thyself?
11 For the lord of this country saith to thee justly, “Either conform to
my laws, or depart from my country.”
12 What then shalt thou do, who art under law in thine own city?
13 For the sake of thy fields and the rest of thy possessions wilt thou
altogether repudiate thy law, and walk according to the law of this
city?
14 Take heed, lest it be inexpedient to repudiate thy law;
15 for if thou shouldest desire to return again to thy city, thou shalt
surely not be received [because thou didst repudiate the law of thy
city], and shalt be shut out from it.
16 Take heed therefore;
17 as dwelling in a strange land prepare nothing more for thyself but
a competency which is sufficient for thee,
18 and make ready that,
19 whensoever the master of this city may desire to cast thee out for
thine opposition to his law, thou mayest go forth from his city and
depart into thine own city, and use thine own law joyfully, free from
all insult.
20 Take heed therefore, ye that serve God and have Him in your
heart work the works of God being mindful of His commandments
and of the promises which He made, and believe Him that He will
perform them, if His commandments be kept.
21 Therefore, instead of fields buy ye souls that are in trouble, as each
is able, and visit widows and orphans, and neglect them not;
22 and spend your riches and all your displays, which ye received
from God, on fields and houses of this kind.
23 For to this end the Master enriched you, that ye might perform
these ministrations for Him.
24 It is much better to purchase fields [and possessions] and houses
of this kind, which thou wilt find in thine own city, when thou visitest
it.
25 This lavish expenditure is beautiful and joyous, not bringing
sadness or fear, but bringing joy.532
Codex Sinaiticus:
26 The expenditure of the heathen then practise not ye;
27 for it is not convenient for you the servants of God.
28 But practise your own expenditure, in which ye can rejoice;
29 and do not corrupt, neither touch that which is another mans, nor
lust after it;
30 for it is wicked to lust after other men’s possessions.
Shepherd 59
1 ANOTHER PARABLE.
2 As I walked in the field, and noticed an elm and a vine,
3 and was distinguishing them and their fruits, the shepherd
appeareth thinking, [Sir,] say I, about the elm and the vine, that they
are excellently suited the one to the other.
4 These two trees, saith he, are appointed for a type to the servants of
God.
5 I would fain know, [Sir,] say I, the type contained in these trees, of
which thou speakest.
6 Seest thou, saith he, the elm and the vine?
7 I see them, Sir, say I.
8 This vine, saith he, beareth fruit, but the elm is an unfruitful stock.
9 Yet this vine, except it climb up the elm, cannot bear much fruit
when it is spread on the ground;
10 and such fruit as it beareth is rotten, because it is not suspended
upon the elm.
11 When then the vine is attached to the elm, it beareth fruit both
from itself and from the elm.
12 Thou seest then that the elm also beareth [much] fruit, not less
than the vine, but rather more.
13 How more, Sir? say I.
14 Because, saith he, the vine, when hanging upon the elm, bears its
fruit in abundance, and in good condition;
15 but, when spread on the ground, it beareth little fruit, and that
rotten.
16 This parable therefore is applicable to the servants of God, to poor
and to rich alike.
17 How, Sir? say I;
18 instruct me.
19 Listen, saith he;
20 the rich man hath much wealth, but in the things of the Lord he is
poor, being distracted about his riches, and his confession and
intercession with the Lord is very scanty;The H. T. Anderson New Testament
533
21 and even that which he giveth is small and weak and hath not
power above.
22 When then the rich man goeth up to the poor, and assisteth him
in his needs,
23 believing that for what he doth to the poor man he shall be able to
obtain a reward with God-because the poor man is rich in
intercession [and confession],
24 and his intercession hath great power with God-the rich man then
supplieth all things to the poor man without wavering.
25 But the poor man being supplied by the rich maketh intercession
for him, thanking God for him that gave to him.
26 And the other is still more zealous to assist the poor man, that he
may he continuous in his life:
27 for he knoweth that the intercession of the poor man is acceptable
and rich before God.
28 They both then accomplish their work;
29 the poor man maketh intercession, wherein he is rich [which he
received of the Lord];
30 this he rendereth again to the Lord Who supplieth him with it.
31 The rich man too in like manner furnisheth to the poor man,
nothing doubting, the riches which he received from the Lord.
32 And this work is great and acceptable with God,
33 because (the rich man) hath understanding concerning his riches,
and worketh for the poor man from the bounties of the Lord, and
accomplisheth the ministration of the Lord rightly.
34 In the sight of men then the elm seemeth not to bear fruit,
35 and they know not, neither perceive,
36 that if there cometh a drought, the elm having water nurtureth the
vine, and the vine having a constant supply of water beareth fruit
twofold, both for itself and for the elm.
37 So likewise the poor, by interceding with the Lord for the rich,
establish their riches, and again the rich, supplying their needs to the
poor, establish their souls.
38 So then both are made partners in the righteous work.
39 He then that doeth these things shall not be abandoned of God,
but shall be written in the books of the living.
40 Blessed are the rich, who understand also that they are enriched
from the Lord.
Shepherd 60
1 ANOTHER PARABLE.
2 He showed me many trees which had no leaves, but they seemed to
me to be, as it were, withered for they were all alike.534
Codex Sinaiticus:
3 And he all alike, and are withered.
4 He answered and said to me;
5 These trees that thou seest are they that dwell in this world.
6 Wherefore then, Sir, say I, are they as if they were withered, and
alike?
7 Because, saith he, neither the righteous are distinguishable, nor
the sinners in this world, but they are alike.
8 For this world is winter to the righteous, and they are not
distinguishable, as they dwell with the sinners.
9 For as in the winter the trees, having shed their leaves, are alike,
and are not distinguishable, which are withered,
10 and which alive, so also in this world neither the just nor the
sinners are distinguishable, but they are all alike.
Shepherd 61
1 ANOTHER PARABLE.
2 He showed me many trees again, some of them sprouting, and
others withered, and he saith to me;
3 Seest thou, saith he, these trees?
4 I see them, Sir, say I, some of them sprouting, and others withered.
5 These trees, saith he, that are sprouting are the righteous, who shall
dwell in the world to come;
6 for the world to come is summer to the righteous, but winter to the
sinners.
7 When then the mercy of the Lord shall shine forth, then they that
serve Cod shall be made manifest;
8 yea, and all men shall be made manifest.
9 For as in summer the fruits of each several tree are made manifest,
10 and are recognised of what sort they are,
11 so also the fruits of the righteous shall be manifest, and all [even
the very smallest] shall be known to be flourishing in that world.
12 But the Gentiles and the sinners,
13 just as thou sawest the trees which were withered,
14 even such shall they be found, withered and unfruitful in that
world, and shall be burnt up as fuel, and shall be manifest, because
their practice in their life hath been evil.
15 For the sinners shall be burned, because they sinned and repented
not;
16 and the Gentiles shall be burned, because they knew not Him that
created them.
17 Do thou therefore bear fruit, that in that summer thy, fruit may be
known.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
535
18 But abstain from overmuch business, and thou shalt never fall
into any sin.
19 For they that busy themselves overmuch, sin much also, being
distracted about their business, and in no wise serving their own
Lord.
20 How then, saith he, can such a man ask anything of the Lord and
receive it, seeing that he serveth not the Lord?
21 [For] they that serve Him, these shall receive their petitions, but
they that serve not the Lord, these shall receive nothing.
22 But if any one work one single action, he is able also to serve the
Lord;
23 for his mind shall not be corrupted from (following) the Lord, but
he shall serve Him, because he keepeth his mind pure.
24 If therefore thou doest these things, thou shalt be able to bear
fruit unto the world to come;
Shepherd 62
1 ANOTHER PARABLE.
2 As I was fasting and seated on a certain mountain, and giving
thanks to the Lord for all that He had done unto me, I see the morn?
3 “Because, Sir, say I, I am keeping a station.
4 What, saith he, is a station?
5 I am fasting, Sir, say I.
6 And what, saith he, is this fast [that ye are fasting]?
7 As I was accustomed, Sir, say I, so I fast.
8 Ye know not, saith he, how to fast unto the Lord, neither is this a
fast, this unprofitable fast which ye make unto Him.
9 Wherefore, Sir, say I, sayest thou this?
10 I tell thee, saith he, that this is not a fast, wherein ye think to fast;
11 but I will teach thee what is a complete fast and acceptable to the
Lord.
12 Listen, saith he;
13 God desireth not such a vain fast;
14 for by so fasting unto God thou shalt do nothing for righteousness.
15 But fast thou [unto God] such a fast as this;
16 do no wickedness in thy life, and serve the Lord with a pure heart;
17 observe His commandments and walk in His ordinances, and let
no evil desire rise up in thy heart;
18 but believe God.
19 Then, if thou shalt do these things, and fear Him, and control
thyself from every evil deed, thou shalt live unto God;536
Codex Sinaiticus:
20 and if thou do these things, thou shalt accomplish a great fast, and
one acceptable to God.
1 Hear the parable which I shall tell thee relating to fasting.
2 A certain man had an estate, and many slaves, and a portion of his
estate he planted as a vineyard;
Shepherd 63
3 and choosing out a certain slave who was trusty and well-pleasing
(and) held in honour, he called him to him and saith unto him:
4 “Take this vineyard [which I have planted], and fence it [till I
come], but do nothing else to the vineyard.
5 Now keep this my commandment, and thou shalt be free in my
house.”
6 Then the master of the servant went away to travel abroad.
7 When then he had gone away, the servant took and fenced the
vineyard;
8 and having finished the fencing of the vineyard, he noticed that the
vineyard was full of weeds.
9 So he reasoned within himself, saying, “ This command of my lord I
have carried out.
10 I will next dig this vineyard, and it shall be neater when it is
digged;
11 and when it hath no weeds it will yield more fruit, because not
choked by the weeds.”
12 He took and digged the vineyard, and all the weeds that were in
the vineyard he plucked up.
13 And that vineyard became very neat and flourishing, when it had
no weeds to choke it.
14 After a time the master of the servant [and of the estate] came,
and he went into the vineyard.
15 And seeing the vineyard fenced neatly, and digged as well, and
[all] the weeds plucked up, and the vines flourishing, he rejoiced
[exceedingly] at what his servant had done.
16 So he called his beloved son, who was his heir,
17 and the friends who were his advisers, and told them what he had
commanded his servant, and how much he had found done.
18 And they rejoiced with the servant at the testimony which his
master had borne to him.
19 And he saith to them;
20 “I promised this servant his freedom, if he should keep the
commandment which I commanded him;
21 but he kept my commandment and did a good work besides to my
vineyard, and pleased me greatly.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
537
22 For this work therefore which he has done, I desire to make him
joint-heir with my son, because, when the good thought struck him,
he did not neglect it, but fulfilled it.”
23 In this purpose the son of the master agreed with him, that the
servant should be made joint-heir with the son.
24 After some few days, his master made a feast, and sent to him
many dainties from the feast.
25 But when the servant received [the dainties sent to him by the
master], he took what was sufficient for him, and distributed the rest
to his fellow-servants.
26 And his fellow-servants, when they received the dainties, rejoiced,
and began to pray for him,
27 that he might find greater favour with the master, because he had
treated them so handsomely.
28 All these things which had taken place his master heard, and
again rejoiced greatly at his deed.
29 So the master called together again his friends and his son, and
announced to them the deed that he had done with regard to his
dainties which he had received;
Shepherd 64
1 I say, Sir, I understand not these parables, neither can I apprehend
thee, saith he;
2 and will show thee whatsoever things I shall speak with thee.
3 Keep the commandments of the Lord, and thou shalt be well-
pleasing to God, and shalt be enrolled among the number of them
that keep His commandments.
4 But if thou do any good thing outside the commandment of God,
thou shalt win for thyself more exceeding glory, and shalt be more
glorious in the sight of God than thou wouldest otherwise have been.
5 If then, while thou keepest the commandments of God, thou add
these services likewise, thou shalt rejoice, if thou observe them
according to my commandment.
6 I say to him, Sir, whatsoever thou commandest me, I will keep it;
7 for I know that thou art with me.
8 I will be with thee, saith he, because thou hast so great zeal for
doing good;
9 yea, and I will be with all, saith he, whosoever have such zeal as
this.
10 This fasting, saith he, if the commandments of the Lord are kept,
is very good.
11 This then is the way, that thou shalt keep this fast [which thou art
about to observe].538
Codex Sinaiticus:
12 First of all, keep thyself from every evil word and every evil desire,
and purify thy heart from all the vanities of this world.
13 If thou keep these things, this fast shall be perfect for thee.
14 And thus shalt thou do.
15 Having fulfilled what is written, on that day on which thou fastest
thou shalt taste nothing but bread and water;
16 and from thy meats, which thou wouldest have eaten,
17 thou shalt reckon up the amount of that days expenditure, which
thou wouldest have incurred,
18 and shalt give it to a widow, or an orphan, or to one in want,
19 and so shalt thou humble thy soul, that he that hath received from
thy humiliation may satisfy his own soul, and may pray for thee to
the Lord.
20 If then thou shalt so accomplish this fast, as I have commanded
thee, thy sacrifice shall be acceptable in the sight of God, and this
fasting shall be recorded;
21 and the service so performed is beautiful and joyous and
acceptable to the Lord.
22 These things thou shalt so observe, thou and thy children and thy
whole household;
23 and, observing them, thou shalt be blessed;
Shepherd 65
1 I entreated him earnestly,
2 that he would show me the parable of the fenced the vineyard, [and
of the fence,]
3 and of the weeds which were plucked up out of the vineyard, and of
the son, and of the friends, the advisers.
4 For I understood that all these things are a parable.
5 but he answered and said unto me;
6 Thou art exceedingly importunate in enquiries.
7 Thou oughtest not, [saith he,] to make any enquiry at all;
8 for if it be right that a thing be explained unto thee, it shall be
explained.
9 I say to him;
10 Sir, whatsoever things thou showest unto me and dost not explain,
I shall have seen them in vain, and without understanding what they
are.
11 In like manner also, if thou speak parables to me and interpret
them not, I shall have heard a thing in vain from thee.
12 But he again answered, and said unto me;The H. T. Anderson New Testament
539
13 Whosoever, saith he, is a servant of God, and hath his own Lord in
his heart, asketh understanding of Him,
14 and receiveth it, and interpreteth every parable, and the words of
the Lord which are spoken in parables are made known unto him.
15 But as many as are sluggish and idle in intercession, these hesitate
to ask of the Lord.
16 But the Lord is abundant in compassion, and giveth to them that
ask of Him without ceasing.
17 But thou who hast been strengthened by the holy angel, and hast
received from him such (powers of) intercession and art not idle,
wherefore dost thou not ask understanding of the Lord, and obtain it
from Him?
18 I say to him, Sir, I that have thee with me have (but) need to ask
thee and enquire of thee;
19 for thou showest me all things, and speakest with me;
20 but if I had seen or heard them apart from thee I should have
asked of the Lord, that they might be shown to me.
Shepherd 66
1 I told thee just now, saith he, that thou art unscrupulous and
importunate, in enquiring for the interpretations of the parables.
2 But since thou art so obstinate, I will interpret to thee the parable
of the estate and all the accompaniments thereof, that thou mayest
make them known unto all.
3 Hear now, saith he, and understand them.
4 The estate is this world, and the lord of the estate is He that created
all things, and set them in order, and endowed them with power;
5 and the servant is the Son of God, and the vines are this people
whom He Himself planted;
6 and the fences are the [holy] angels of the Lord who keep together
His people;
7 and the weeds, which are plucked up from the vineyard, are the
transgressions of the servants of God;
8 and the dainties which He sent to him from the feast are the
commandments which He gave to His people through His Son;
9 and the friends and advisers are the holy angels which were first
created;
10 and the absence of the master is the time which remaineth over
until His coming.
11 I say to him;
12 Sir, great and marvelous are all things and all things are glorious;
13 was it likely then, say I, that I could have apprehended them?540
Codex Sinaiticus:
14 Nay, nor can any other man, though he be full of understanding,
apprehend them.
15 Yet again, Sir, say I, explain to me what I am about to enquire of
thee.
16 Say on, he saith, if thou desirest anything.
Shepherd 67
1 Listen, said he;
2 the Son of God is not represented in the guise of a I;
3 I comprehend not.
4 Because, saith he, God planted the vineyard, that is, He created the
people, and delivered them over to His Son.
5 And the Son placed the angels in charge of them, to watch over
them;
6 and the Son Himself cleansed their sins, by labouring much and
enduring many toils;
7 for no one can dig without toil or labour.
8 Having Himself then cleansed the sins of His people, He showed
them the paths of life, giving them the law which He received from
His Father.
9 Thou seest, saith he, that He is Himself Lord of the people, having
received all power from His Father.
10 But how that the lord took his son and the glorious angels as
advisers concerning the inheritance of the servant, listen.
11 The Holy Pre-existent Spirit, Which created the whole creation,
God made to dwell in flesh that He desired.
12 This flesh, therefore, in which the Holy Spirit dwelt, was subject
unto the Spirit, walking honourably in holiness and purity, without in
any way defiling the Spirit.
13 When then it had lived honourably in chastity,
14 and had laboured with the Spirit, and had cooperated with it in
everything, behaving itself boldly and bravely, He chose it as a
partner with the Holy Spirit;
15 for the career of this flesh pleased [the Lord], seeing that, as
possessing the Holy Spirit, it was not defiled upon the earth.
16 He therefore took the son as adviser and the glorious angels also,
17 that this flesh too, having served the Spirit unblameably, might
have some place of sojourn, and might not seem to have lost the
reward for its service;
18 for all flesh, which is found undefiled and unspotted, wherein the
Holy Spirit dwelt, shall receive a reward.
Shepherd 68The H. T. Anderson New Testament
541
1 I was right glad, Sir, say I, to hear this interpretation.
2 Listen now, saith he.
3 Keep this thy flesh pure and undefiled, that the Spirit justified.
4 See that it never enter into thine heart that this flesh of thine is
perishable, and so thou abuse it in come defilement.
5 [For] if thou defile thy flesh, thou shalt defile the Holy Spirit also;
6 but if thou defile +the flesh, thou shalt not live.
7 But if, Sir, say I, there has been any ignorance in times past, before
these words were heard, how shall a man who has defiled his flesh be
saved?
8 For the former deeds of ignorance, saith he, God alone hath power
to give healing;
9 for all authority is His.
10 [But now keep thyself, and the Lord Almighty, Who is full of
compassion, will give healing for thy former deeds of ignorance,] if
henceforth thou defile not thy flesh, neither the Spirit;
11 for both share in common, and the one cannot be defiled without
the other.
Shepherd 69
1 [PARABLE THE SIXTH].
2 As I sat in my house, and glorified the Lord for all things that I had
seen, and was considering concerning the glorious and able to save a
mans soul, I said within myself;
3 Blessed shall I be, if I walk in these commandments;
4 yea, and whosoever shall walk in them shall be blessed.
5 As I spake these things within thyself, I see him suddenly seated by
me, and saying as follows;
6 Why art thou of a doubtful mind concerning the commandments,
which I commanded thee?
7 They are beautiful.
8 Doubt not at all;
9 but clothe thyself in the faith of the Lord, and thou shalt walk in
them.
10 For I will strengthen thee in them.
11 These commandments are suitable for those who meditate
repentance for if they walk not in them, their repentance is in vain.
12 Ye then that repent, cast away the evil doings of this world which
crush you;
13 and, by putting on every excellence of righteousness, ye shall be
able to observe these commandments, and to add no more to your
sins.542
Codex Sinaiticus:
14 If then ye add no further sin at all, ye will depart from your former
sins.
15 Walk then in these my commandments, and ye shall live unto
God.
16 These things have [all] been told you from me.
17 And after he had told these things to me, he saith to me, Let us go
into the country, and I will show thee the shepherds of the sheep.
18 Let us go, Sir, say I.
19 And we came to a certain plain, and he showeth me a young man,
a shepherd, clothed in a light cloak, of saffron colour;
20 and he was feeding a great number of sheep, and these sheep
were, as it were, well fed and very frisky, and were gladsome as they
skipped about hither and thither;
21 and the shepherd himself was all gladsome over his flock;
22 and the very visage of the shepherd was exceedingly gladsome;
23 and he ran about among the sheep.
Shepherd 70
1 And he saith to me;
2 Seest thou this shepherd?
3 I see him, Sir, I say.
4 This, saith he, is the angel of self-indulgence and of deceit.
5 He crusheth the souls of the servants of God, and perverteth them
from the truth, leading them astray with evil desires, wherein they
perish.
6 For they forget the commandments of the living God, and walk in
vain deceits and acts of self-indulgence, and are destroyed by this
angel, some of them unto death, and others unto corruption.
7 I say to him, Sir, I comprehend not what means “unto death,” and
what “unto corruption”.
8 Listen, saith he;
9 the sheep which thou sawest gladsome and skipping about, these
are they who have been turned asunder from God utterly, and have
delivered themselves over to the lusts of this world.
10 In these, therefore, there is not repentance unto life.
11 For the Name of God is being blasphemed through them.
12 The life of such persons is death.
13 But the sheep, which thou sawest not skipping about, but feeding
in one place,
14 these are they that have delivered themselves over to acts of self-
indulgence and deceit, but have not uttered any blasphemy against
the Lord.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
543
15 These then have been corrupted from the truth.
16 In these there is hope of repentance, wherein they can live.
17 Corruption then hath hope of a possible renewal, but death hath
eternal destruction.
18 Again we went forward a little way, and he showeth me a great
shepherd like a wild man in appearance, with a white goatskin
thrown about him;
19 and he had a kind of wallet on his shoulders, and a staff very hard
and with knots in it, and a great whip.
20 And his look was very sour, so that I was afraid of him because of
his look.
21 This shepherd then kept receiving from the young man, the
shepherd,
22 those sheep that were frisky and well-fed,
23 but not skipping about, and putting them in a certain spot,
24 which was precipitous and covered with thorns and briars, so that
the sheep could not disentangle themselves from the thorns and
briars, but [became entangled among the thorns and briars.
25 And so they] pastured entangled in the thorns and briars, and
were in great misery with being beaten by him;
26 and he kept driving them about to and fro, and giving them no
rest, and altogether those sheep had not a happy time.
Shepherd 71
1 When then I saw them so lashed with the whip and vexed, I was
sorry for their sakes, because they were so tortured and had no rest
at all.
2 I say to the shepherd who was speaking with me;
3 Sir, who is this shepherd, who is [so] hard-hearted and severe, and
has no compassion at all for these sheep?
4 This, saith he, is the angel of punishment, and he is one of the just
angels, and presides over punishment.
5 So he receiveth those who wander away from God, and walk after
the lusts and deceits of this life, and punisheth them, as they deserve,
with fearful and various punishments.
6 I would fain learn, Sir, say I, of what sort are these various
punishments.
7 Listen, saith he;
8 the various tortures and punishments are tortures belonging to the
present life;
9 for some are punished with losses, and others with want,544
Codex Sinaiticus:
10 and others with divers maladies, and others with [every kind] of
unsettlement, and others with insults from unworthy persons and
with suffering in many other respects.
11 For many, being unsettled in their plans, set their hands to many
things, and nothing ever goes forward with them.
12 And then they say that they do not prosper in their doings, and it
doth not enter into their hearts that they have done evil deeds, but
they blame the Lord.
13 When then they are afflicted with every kind of affliction,
14 then they are delivered over to me for good instruction, and are
strengthened in the faith of the Lord, and serve the Lord with a pure
heart the remaining days of their life.
15 But, if they repent, the evil works which they have done rise up in
their hearts,
16 and then they glorify God, saying that He is a just Judge, and that
they suffered justly each according to his doings.
17 And they serve the Lord thenceforward with a pure heart, and are
prosperous in all their doings, receiving from the Lord whatsoever
things they may ask;
Shepherd 72
1 I say unto him;
2 Sir, declare unto me this further matter.
3 What self-indulgence and are deceived undergo torments during
the same length of time as they live in self-indulgence and are
deceived.
4 He saith to me, They undergo torments for the same length of time.
5 Then, Sir, say I, they undergo very slight torments;
6 for those who are living thus in self-indulgence and forget God
ought to have been tormented sevenfold.
7 He saith to me, Thou art foolish, and comprehendest not the power
of the torment.
8 True, say I, for if I had comprehended it, I should not have asked
thee to declare it to me.
9 Listen, saith he, to the power of both, [of the self-indulgence and of
the torment].
10 The time of the self-indulgence and deceit is one hour.
11 But an hour of the torment hath the power of thirty days.
12 If then one live in self-indulgence and be deceived for one day, and
be tormented for one day, the day of the torment is equivalent to a
whole year.
13 For as many days then as a man lives in self-indulgence, for so
many years is he tormented.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
545
14 Thou seest then, saith he, that the time of the self-indulgence and
deceit is very short, but the time of the punishment and torment is
long.
Shepherd 73
1 Inasmuch, Sir, say I, as I do not quite comprehend concerning the
time of the deceit and self-indulgence and torment, show me more
clearly.
2 He answered and said unto me;
3 Thy stupidity cleaveth to thee;
4 and thou wilt not cleanse thy heart and serve God.
5 Take heed, [saith he,] lest haply the time be fulfilled, and thou be
found in thy foolishness.
6 Listen then, [saith he,] even as thou wishest, that thou mayest
comprehend the matter.
7 He that liveth in self-indulgence and is deceived for one day, and
doeth what he wisheth, is clothed in much folly and comprehendeth
not the thing which he doeth;
8 for on the morrow he forgetteth what he did the day before.
9 For self-indulgence and deceit have no memories, by reason of the
folly, wherewith each is clothed;
10 but when punishment and torment cling to a man for a single day,
he is punished and tormented for a whole year long;
11 for punishment and torment have long memories.
12 So being tormented and punished for the whole year, the man
remembers at length the self-indulgence and deceit, and perceiveth
that it is on their account that he is suffering these ills.
13 Every man, therefore, that liveth in self-indulgence and is
deceived, is tormented in this way because, though possessing life,
they have delivered themselves over unto death.
14 What kinds of self-indulgence, Sir, say I, are harmful?
15 “Every action, saith he, is self-indulgence to a man, which he does
with pleasure;
16 for the irascible man, when he gives the reins to his passion, is
self-indulgent;
17 and the adulterer and the drunkard and the slanderer and the liar
and the miser and the defrauder and he that doeth things akin to
these, giveth the reins to his peculiar passion;
18 therefore he is self-indulgent in his action.
19 All these habits of self-indulgence are harmful to the servants of
God;
20 on account of these deceits therefore they so suffer who are
punished and tormented.546
Codex Sinaiticus:
21 But there are habits of self-indulgence likewise which save men;
22 for many are self-indulgent in doing good, being carried away by
the pleasure it gives to themselves.
23 This self-indulgence then is expedient for the servants of God, and
bringeth life to a man of this disposition;
24 but the harmful self-indulgencies afore-mentioned bring to men
torments and punishments;
Shepherd 74
1 [PARABLE THE SEVENTH].
2 After a few days I saw him on the same plain, where also I had seen
the shepherds, and he saith to me, What seekest punisheth go out of
My house;
3 for he afflicteth me much.
4 It is necessary for thee, saith he, to be afflicted;
5 for so, saith he, the glorious angel ordered as concerning thee, for
he wisheth thee to be proved.
6 Why, what so evil thing have I done, Sir, say I, that I should be
delivered over to this angel?
7 “ Listen, saith he.
8 Thy sins are many, yet not so many that thou shouldest be
delivered over to this angel;
9 but thy house has committed great iniquities and sins,
10 and the glorious angel was embittered at their deeds,
11 and for this cause he made thee be afflicted for a certain time, that
they also might repent and cleanse themselves from every lust of this
world.
12 When therefore they shall repent and be cleansed, then shall the
angel of punishment depart.
13 I say to him;
14 Sir, if they perpetrated such deeds that the glorious angel is
embittered, what have I done?
15 They cannot be afflicted otherwise, saith he, unless thou, the head
of the [whole] house, be afflicted;
16 for if thou be afflicted, they also of necessity will be afflicted;
17 but if thou be prosperous, they can suffer no affliction.
18 But behold, Sir, say I, they have repented with their whole heart.
19 I am quite aware myself, saith he, that they have repented with
their whole heart;
20 well, thinkest thou that the sins of those who repent are forgiven
forthwith?
21 Certainly not;The H. T. Anderson New Testament
547
22 but the person who repents must torture his own soul, and must
be thoroughly humble in his every action, and be afflicted with all the
divers kinds of affliction;
23 and if he endure the afflictions which come upon him, assuredly
He Who created all things and endowed them with power will be
moved with compassion and will bestow some remedy.
Shepherd 75
1 But why speak I many words to thee?
2 Thou must be afflicted as the angel of the Lord commanded, even
he that delivered thee unto me;
3 and for this give thanks to the Lord, in that He deemed thee worthy
that I should reveal unto thee beforehand the affliction, that
foreknowing it thou mightest endure it with fortitude.
4 I say to him;
5 Sir, be thou with, me, and I shall be able to endure all affliction
[easily].
6 I will be with thee, saith he;
7 and I will ask the angel that punisheth to afflict thee more lightly;
8 but thou shalt be afflicted for a short time, and thou shalt be
restored again to thy house.
9 Only continue to be humble and to minister unto the Lord with a
pure heart,
10 thou and thy children and thy house, and walk in my
commandments which I command thee, and thus it will be possible
for thy repentance to be strong and pure.
11 And if thou keep these commandments with thy household, all
affliction shall hold aloof from thee;
Shepherd 76
1 [PARABLE THE EIGHTH].
2 He showed me a [great] willow, overshadow are called by the name
of the Lord.
3 And by the willow there stood an angel of the Lord, glorious and
very tall, having a great sickle,
4 and he was lopping branches from the willow, and giving them to
the people that sheltered beneath the willow;
5 and he gave them little rods about a cubit long.
6 And after all had taken the rods, the angel laid aside the sickle, and
the tree was sound, just as I had seen it.
7 Then I marvelled within myself, saying, How is the tree sound after
so many branches have been lopped off?548
Codex Sinaiticus:
8 The shepherd saith to me, Marvel not that the tree remained
sound, after so many branches were lopped off;
9 but wait until thou seest all things, and it shall be shown to thee
what it is.
10 The angel who gave the rods to the people demanded them back
from them again;
11 and according as they had received them, so also they were
summoned to him, and each of them returned the several rods.
12 But the angel of the Lord took them, and examined them.
13 From some he received the rods withered and eaten as it were by
grubs:
14 the angel ordered those who gave up rods like these to stand apart.
15 And others gave them up withered, but not grub-eaten;
16 and these again he ordered to stand apart.
17 And others gave them up half-withered;
18 these also stood apart.
19 And others gave up their rods half-withered and with cracks;
20 these also stood apart.
21 And others gave up their rods green and with cracks;
22 these also stood apart.
23 And others gave up their rods one half withered and one half
green;
24 these also stood apart.
25 And others brought their rods two parts of the rod green, and the
third part withered;
26 these also stood apart.
27 And others gave them up two parts withered, and the third part
green;
28 these also stood apart.
29 And others gave up their rods nearly all green, but a very small
portion of their rods was withered, just the end;
30 but they had cracks in them;
31 these also stood apart.
32 And in those of others there was a very small portion green, but
the rest of the rods was withered;
33 these also stood apart.
34 And others came bringing their rods green, as they received them
from the angel;
35 and the most part of the multitude gave up their rods in this state;
36 and the angel rejoiced exceedingly at these;
37 these also stood apart.
38 And others gave up their rods green and with shoots;The H. T. Anderson New Testament
549
39 these also stood apart;
40 and at these again the angel rejoiced exceedingly.
41 And others gave up their rods green and with shoots;
42 and their shoots had, as it were, a kind of fruit.
43 And those men were exceeding gladsome, whose rods were found
in this state.
44 And over them the angel exulted, and the shepherd was very
gladsome over them.
Shepherd 77
1 And the angel of the Lord commanded crowns to be brought.
2 And crowns were brought, made as it were of palm-branches;
3 and he crowned the men that had given up the rods which had the
shoots and some fruit, and sent them away into the tower.
4 And the others also he sent into the tower, even those who had
given up the rods green and with shoots, but the shoots were without
fruit;
5 and he set a seal upon them.
6 And all they that went into the tower had the same raiment, white
as snow.
7 And those that had given up their rods green as they received them,
he sent away, giving them a [white] robe, and seals.
8 After the angel had finished these things, he saith to the shepherd;
9 I go away;
10 but these thou shall send away to (their places within) the walls,
according as each deserveth to dwell;
11 but examine their rods carefully, and so send them away.
12 But be careful in examining them.
13 Take heed lest any escape thee, saith he.
14 Still if any escape thee, I will test then, at the altar.
15 When he had thus spoken to the shepherd, he departed.
16 And, after the angel had departed, the shepherd saith to me;
17 Let us take the rods of all and plant them, to see whether any of
them shall be able to live.
18 I say unto him, Sir, these withered things, how can they live?
19 He answered and said unto me;
20 This tree is a willow, and this class of trees clingeth to life.
21 If then the rods shall be planted and get a little moisture, many of
them will live.
22 And afterwards let us try to pour some water also over them.
23 If any of them shall be able to live, I will rejoice with it;
24 but if it live not, I at least shall not be found neglectful.550
Codex Sinaiticus:
25 So the shepherd made me call them, just as each one of them was
stationed.
26 And they came row after row, and they delivered up the rods to
the shepherd.
27 And the shepherd took the rods, and planted them in rows, and
after he had planted them, he poured much water over them, so that
the rods could not be seen for the water.
28 And after he had watered the rods, he saith to me;
29 Let us go now, and after a few days let us return and inspect all
the rods;
30 for He Who created this tree willeth that all those who have
received rods from this tree should live.
Shepherd 78
1 I say to him;
2 Sir, inform me what this tree is.
3 For I am perplexed and nothing appears to have been cut from it;
4 I am therefore perplexed thereat.
5 Listen, saith he;
6 this great tree which overshadows plains and mountains and all the
earth is the law of God which was given to the whole world;
7 and this law is the Son of God preached unto the ends of the earth.
8 But the people that are under the shadow are they that have heard
the preaching, and believed on Him;
9 but the great and glorious angel is Michael, who hath the power
over this people and is their captain.
10 For this is he that putteth the law into the hearts of the believers;
11 therefore he himself inspecteth them to whom he gave it, to see
whether they have observed it.
12 But thou seest the rods of every one;
13 for the rods are the law.
14 Thou seest these many rods rendered useless, and thou shalt
notice all those that have not observed the law, and shalt see the
abode of each severally.
15 I say unto him;
16 Sir, wherefore did he send away some into the tower, and leave
others for thee?
17 As many, saith he, as transgressed the law which they received
from him, these he left under my authority for repentance;
18 but as many as already satisfied the law and have observed it,
these he has under his own authority.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
551
19 Who then, Sir, say I, are they that have been crowned and go into
the tower?
20 [As many, saith he, as wrestled with the devil and overcame him
in their wrestling, are crowned:]
21 these are they that suffered for the law.
22 But the others, who likewise gave up their rods green and with
shoots,
23 though not with fruit, are they that were persecuted for the law,
but did not suffer nor yet deny their law.
24 But they that gave them up green just as they received them, are
sober and righteous men, who walked altogether in a pure heart and
have kept the commandments of the Lord.
Shepherd 79
1 And after a few days we came to the place, and the shepherd sat
down thyself with a garment of raw flax, and minister to me.
2 So I girded myself with a clean garment of raw flax made of coarse
material.
3 And when he saw me girded and ready to minister to him, Call,
saith he, the men whose rods have been planted, according to the
rank as each presented their rods.
4 And I went away to the plain, and called them all;
5 and they stood all of them according to their ranks.
6 He saith to them;
7 Let each man pluck out his own rod, and bring it to me.
8 Those gave them up first, who had had the withered and chipped
rods, and they were found accordingly withered and chipped.
9 He ordered them to stand apart.
10 Then those gave them up, who had the withered but not chipped;
11 and some of them gave up the rods green, and others withered and
chipped as by grubs.
12 Those then that gave them up green he ordered to stand apart;
13 but those that gave them up withered and chipped he ordered to
stand with the first.
14 Then those gave them up who had had the half-withered and with
cracks;
15 and many of them gave them up green and without cracks;
16 and some gave them up green and with shoots, and fruits on the
shoots, such as those had who went into the tower crowned;
17 and some gave them up withered and eaten, and some withered
and uneaten, and some such as they were, half-withered and with
cracks.552
Codex Sinaiticus:
18 He ordered them to stand each one apart, some in their proper
ranks, and others apart.
Shepherd 80
1 Then those gave them up who had their rods green, but with cracks.
2 These all gave them up green, and stood in their own company.
3 And the shepherd rejoiced over these, because they all were
changed and had put away their cracks.
4 And those gave them up likewise who had the one half green and
the other half withered.
5 The rods of some were found entirely green, of some half-withered,
of some withered and eaten, and of some green and with shoots.
6 These were all sent away each to his company.
7 Then those gave them up who had two parts green and the third
withered;
8 many of them gave them up green, and many half-withered, and
others withered and eaten.
9 These all stood in their own company.
10 Then those gave them up who had two parts withered and the
third part green.
11 Many of them gave them up half-withered, but some withered and
eaten, others half-withered and with cracks, and a few green.
12 These all stood in their own company.
13 Then those gave them up who had had their rods green, but a very
small part [withered] and with cracks.
14 Of these some gave them up green, and others green and with
shoots.
15 These also went away to their own company.
16 Then those gave them up who had a very small part green and the
other parts withered.
17 The rods of these were found for the most part green and with
shoots and fruit on the shoots, and others altogether green.
18 At these rods the shepherd rejoiced very [greatly], because they
were found so.
19 And these went away each to his own company.
Shepherd 81
1 After [the shepherd] had examined the rods of all, he saith to me, I
told thee that this tree clingeth to life.
2 Seest thou, saith he, how many repented and were saved?
3 I see, Sir, say I.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
553
4 It is, saith he, that thou mayest see the abundant compassion of the
Lord, how great and glorious it is,
5 and He hath given (His) Spirit to those that are worthy of
repentance.
6 Wherefore then, Sir, say I, did they not all repent?
7 To those, whose heart He saw about to become pure and to serve
Him with all the heart, to them He gave repentance;
8 but those whose craftiness and wickedness He saw who intend to
repent in hypocrisy, to them He gave not repentance, lest haply they
should again profane His name.
9 I say unto him,
10 Sir, now then show me concerning those that have given up their
rods, what manner of man each of them is, and their abode,
11 that when they hear this, they that believed and have received the
seal and have broken it and did not keep it sound may fully
understand what they are doing, and repent, receiving from thee a
seal, and may glorify the Lord,
12 that He had compassion upon them and sent thee to renew their
spirits.
13 Listen, saith he;
14 those whose rods were found withered and grub-eaten,
15 these are the renegades and traitors to the Church, that
blasphemed the Lord in their sins, and still further were ashamed of
the Name of the Lord, which was invoked upon them.
16 These then perished altogether unto God.
17 But thou seest how not one of them repented, although they heard
the words which thou spakest to them, which I commanded thee.
18 From men of this kind life departed.
19 But those that gave up the green and undecayed (rods), these also
are near them;
20 for they were hypocrites,
21 and brought in strange doctrines, and perverted the servants of
God, especially them that had sinned,
22 not permitting them to repent, but persuading them with their
foolish doctrines.
23 These then have hope of repenting.
24 But thou seest that many of them have indeed repented from the
time when thou spakest to them my commandments;
25 yea, and (others) still will repent.
26 And as many as shall not repent, have lost their life;
27 but as many of them as repented, became good;
28 and their dwelling was placed within the first walls, and some of
them even ascended into the tower.554
Codex Sinaiticus:
29 Thou seest then, [saith he,] that repentance from sins bringeth
life, but not to repent bringeth death.
Shepherd 82
1 But as many as gave up (the rods) half-withered, and with cracks in
them, hear also concerning these.
2 Those whose rods were half-withered throughout are the double-
minded;
3 for they neither live nor are dead.
4 But those that have them half-withered and cracks in then,, these
are both double-minded and slanderers, and are never at peace
among themselves but always causing dissensions.
5 Yet even to these, [saith he,] repentance is given.
6 Thou seest, [saith he,] that some of them have repented;
7 and there is still, saith he, hope of repentance among them.
8 And as many of them, saith he, as have repented, have their abode
within the tower but as many of them as have repented tardily shall
abide within the walls;
9 and as many as repent not, but continue in their doings, shall die
the death.
10 But they that have given up their rods green and with cracks, these
were found faithful and good at all times, [but] they have a certain
emulation one with another about first places and about glory of
some kind or other;
11 but all these are foolish in having (emulation) one with another
about first places.
12 Yet these also, when they heard my commandments, being good,
purified themselves and repented quickly.
13 They have their habitation, therefore, within the tower.
14 But if any one shall again turn to dissension, he shall be cast out
from the tower and shall lose his life.
15 Life is for all those that keep the commandments of the Lord.
16 But in the commandments there is nothing about first places, or
about glory of any kind, but about long-suffering and humility in
man.
17 In such men, therefore, is the life of the Lord, but in factious and
lawless men is death.
Shepherd 83
1 But they that gave up their rods half green and half withered, these
are they that are mixed up in business and cleave not to the saints.
2 Therefore the one half of them liveth, but the other half is dead.
3 Many then when they heard my commandments repented.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
555
4 As many then as repented, have their abode within the tower.
5 But some of them altogether stood aloof.
6 These then have no repentance;
7 for by reason of their business affairs they blasphemed the Lord
and denied Him.
8 So they lost their life for the wickedness that they committed.
9 But many of them were doubtful-minded.
10 These still have place for repentance, if they repent quickly, and
their dwelling shall be within the tower;
11 and if they repent tardily, they shall dwell within the walls;
12 but if they repent not, they too have lost their life.
13 But they that have given up two parts green and the third part
withered, these are they that have denied with manifold denials.
14 Many of them therefore repented, and departed to dwell inside the
tower;
15 but many utterly rebelled from God;
16 these lost their life finally.
17 And some of them were double-minded and caused dissensions.
18 For these then there is repentance, if they repent speedily and
continue not in their pleasures;
19 but if they continue in their doings, they likewise procure for
themselves death.
Shepherd 84
1 But they that have given up their rods two thirds withered and one
third green, these are men who have been believers, but grew rich
and became renowned among the Gentiles.
2 They clothed themselves with great pride and became high-
minded,
3 and abandoned the truth and did not cleave to the righteous, but
lived together after the manner of the Gentiles, and the path
appeared the more pleasant unto them;
4 yet they departed not from God, but continued in the faith, though
they wrought not the works of the faith.
5 Many of them therefore repented, and they had their habitation
within the tower.
6 But others at the last living with the Gentiles, and being corrupted
the vain opinions of the Gentiles, departed from God, and worked the
works of the Gentiles.
7 These therefore were numbered with the Gentiles.
8 But others of them were doubtful-minded, not hoping to be saved
by reason of the deeds that they had done;556
Codex Sinaiticus:
9 and others were double-minded and made divisions among
themselves.
10 For these then that were double-minded by reason of their doings
there is still repentance;
11 but their repentance ought to be speedy, that their dwelling may
be within the tower;
12 but for those who repent not, but continue in their pleasures,
death is nigh.
Shepherd 85
1 But they that gave up their rods green, yet with the extreme ends
withered and with cracks;
2 these were found at all times good and faithful and glorious in the
sight of God,
3 but they sinned to a very slight degree by reason of little desires
and because they had somewhat against one another.
4 But, when they heard my words, the greater part quickly repented,
and their dwelling was assigned within the tower.
5 But some of them were double-minded, and some being double-
minded made a greater dissension.
6 In these then there is still a hope of repentance, because they were
found always good;
7 and hardly shall one of them die.
8 But they that gave up their rods withered, yet with a very small part
green, these are they that believed, but practised the works of
lawlessness.
9 Still they never separated from God, but bore the Name gladly, and
gladly received into their houses the servants of God.
10 So hearing of this repentance they repented without wavering, and
they practise all excellence and righteousness.
11 And some of them even suffer persecution willingly, knowing the
deeds that they did.
12 All these then shall have their dwelling within the tower.
Shepherd 86
1 And after he had completed the interpretations of all the rods, he
saith unto me;
2 Go, and tell all men to repent, and they shall live unto God;
3 for the Lord in His compassion sent me to give repentance to all,
though some of them do not deserve it for their deeds;
4 but being long-suffering the Lord willeth them that were called
through His Son to be saved.
5 I say to him;The H. T. Anderson New Testament
557
6 Sir, I hope that all when they hear these words will repent;
7 for I am persuaded that each one, when he fully knows his own
deeds and fears God, will repent.
8 He answered and said unto me;
9 As many, [saith he,] as [shall repent] from their whole heart [and]
shall cleanse themselves from all the evil deeds afore-mentioned,
10 and shall add nothing further to their sins,
11 shall receive healing from the Lord for their former sins, unless
they be double-minded concerning these commandments, and they
shall live unto God.
12 [But as many, saith he, as shall add to their sins and walk in the
lusts of this world, shall condemn themselves to death.]
13 But do thou walk in my commandments, and live [unto God;
14 yea, and as many as shall walk in them and shall do rightly, shall
live unto God.]
15 Having shown me all these things [and told me them] he saith to
me;
Shepherd 87
1 [PARABLE THE NINTH].
2 After I had written down the commandments and parables of the
shepherd, the angel of repentance, he came to me and saith with thee
in the form of the Church, showed unto thee.
3 For that Spirit is the Son of God.
4 For when thou wast weaker in the flesh, it was not declared unto
thee through an angel;
5 but when thou wast enabled through the Spirit, and didst grow
mighty in thy strength so that thou couldest even see an angel,
6 then at length was manifested unto thee, through the Church, the
building of the tower.
7 In fair and seemly manner hast thou seen all things, (instructed) as
it were by a virgin;
8 but now thou seest (being instructed by an angel, though by the
same Spirit;
9 yet must thou learn everything more accurately from me.
10 For to this end also was I appointed by the glorious angel to dwell
in thy house, that thou mightest see all things mightily, in nothing
terrified, even as before.
11 And he took me away into Arcadia, to a certain rounded mountain,
and set me on the top of the mountain, and showed me a great plain,
and round the plain twelve mountains, the mountains having each a
different appearance.
12 The first was black as soot;558
Codex Sinaiticus:
13 the second was bare, without vegetation;
14 the third was thorny and full of briars;
15 the fourth had the vegetation half-withered, the upper part of the
grass green, but the part by the roots withered, and some of the grass
became withered, whenever the sun had scorched it;
16 the fifth mountain had green grass and was rugged;
17 the sixth mountain was full with clefts throughout, some small and
some great, and the clefts had vegetation,
18 but the grass was not very luxuriant, but rather as if it had been
withered;
19 the seventh mountain had smiling vegetation, and the whole
mountain was in a thriving condition, and cattle and birds of every
kind did feed upon that mountain;
20 and the more the cattle and the birds did feed, so much the more
did the herbage of that mountain flourish.
21 The eighth mountain was full of springs, and every kind of
creature of the Lord did drink of the springs on that mountain.
22 The ninth mountain had no water at all, and was entirely desert;
23 and it had in it wild beasts and deadly reptile, which destroy
mankind.
24 The tenth mountain had very large trees and was umbrageous
throughout, and beneath the shade lay sheep resting and feeding.
25 The eleventh mountain was thickly wooded all over, and the trees
thereon were very productive, decked with divers kinds of fruits, so
that one seeing then would desire to eat of their fruits.
26 The twelfth mountain was altogether white and its aspect was
cheerful;
27 and the mountain was most beauteous in itself 88.
28 And in the middle of the plain he showed me a great white rock,
rising up from the plain.
29 The rock was loftier than the mountains, being four-square, so
that it could contain the whole world.
30 Now this rock was ancient, and had a gate hewn out of it;
31 but the gate seemed to me to have been hewed out quite recently.
32 And the gate glistened beyond the brightness of the sun, so that I
marvelled at the brightness of the gate.
33 And around the gate stood twelve virgins.
34 The four then that stood at the corners seemed to me to be more
glorious (than the rest);
35 but the others likewise were glorious;
36 and they stood at the four quarters of the gate, and virgins stood
in pairs between them.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
559
37 And they were clothed in linen tunics and girt about in seemly
fashion, having their right shoulders free, as if they intended to carry
some burden.
38 Thus were they prepared, for they were very cheerful and eager.
39 After I had seen these things, I marvelled in myself at the
greatness and the glory of what I was seeing.
40 And again I was perplexed concerning the virgins, that delicate as
they were they stood up like men, as if they intended to carry the
whole heaven.
41 And the shepherd saith unto me;
42 Why questionest thou within thyself and art perplexed, and
bringest sadness on thyself?
43 For whatsoever things thou canst not comprehend, attempt them
not, if thou art prudent;
44 but entreat the Lord, that thou mayest receive understanding to
comprehend them.
45 What is behind thee thou canst not see, but what is before thee
thou beholdest.
46 The things therefore which thou canst not see, let alone, and
trouble not thyself (about then);
47 but the things which thou seest, these master, and be not over
curious about the rest;
48 but I will explain unto thee all things whatsoever I shall show
thee.
Shepherd 88
[no verses]
Shepherd 89
1 I saw six men come, tall and glorious and alike in appearance;
2 and they summoned a multitude of men.
3 And the others also which came were tall men above the gate.
4 And there arose a great noise from those men who had come to
build the tower, as they ran hither and thither round the gate.
5 For the virgins standing round the gate told the men to hasten to
build the tower.
6 Now the virgins had spread out their hands, as if they would take
something from the men.
7 And the six men ordered stones to come up from a certain deep
place, and to go to the building of the tower.
8 And there went up ten stones square and polished, [not] hewn
from a quarry.560
Codex Sinaiticus:
9 And the six men called to the virgins, and ordered them to carry all
the stones which should go unto the building of the tower, and to
pass through the gate and to hand them to the men that were about
to build the tower.
10 And the virgins laid the first ten stones that rose out of the deep
on each other, and they carried them together, stone by stone.
Shepherd 90
1 And just as they stood together around the gate, in that order they
carried them that seemed to be strong enough and had stooped
under the corners of the stone, while the others stooped at the sides
of the stone.
2 And so they carried all the stones.
3 And they carried them right through the gate, as they were ordered,
and handed them to the men for the tower;
4 and these took the stones and builded.
5 Now the building of the tower was upon the great rock and above
the gate.
6 Those ten stones then were joined together, and they covered the
whole rock.
7 And these formed a foundation for the building of the tower.
8 And [the rock and] the gate supported the whole tower.
9 And, after the ten stones, other twenty-five stones came up from
the deep, and these were fitted into the building of the tower, being
carried by the virgins, like the former.
10 And after these thirty-five stones came up.
11 And these likewise were fitted into the tower.
12 And after these came up other forty stones, and these all were put
into the building of the tower.
13 So four rows were made in the foundations of the tower.
14 And (the stones) ceased coming up from the deep, and the
builders likewise ceased for a little.
15 And again the six men ordered the multitude of the people to
bring in stones from the mountains for the building of the tower.
16 They were brought in accordingly from all the mountains, of
various colours, shaped by the men, and were handed to the virgins;
17 and the virgins carried them right through the gate, and handed
them in for the building of the tower.
18 And when the various stones were placed in the building, they
became all alike and white, and they lost their various colours.
19 But some stones were handed in by the men for the building, and
these did not become bright;
20 but just as they were placed, such likewise were they found;The H. T. Anderson New Testament
561
21 for they were not handed in by the virgins, nor had they been
carried in through the gate.
22 These stones then were unsightly in the building of the tower.
23 Then the six men, seeing the stones that were unsightly in the
building, ordered them to be removed and carried [below] into their
own place whence they were brought.
24 And they say to the men who were bringing the stones in;
25 Abstain for your parts altogether from handing in stones for the
building;
26 but place them by the tower, that the virgins may carry them
through the gate, and hand them in for the building.
27 For if, [say they,] they be not carried in through the gate by the
hands of these virgins, they cannot change their colours.
28 Labor not therefore, [say they,] in vain.
Shepherd 91
1 And the building was finished on that day, yet was not the tower
finally completed, for it was to be carried up [still] higher;
2 and there was a cessation in the building.
3 And the six men ordered the builders to retire for a short time [all
of them], and to rest;
4 but the virgins they ordered not to retire from the tower.
5 And me thought the virgins were left to guard the tower.
6 And after all had retired [and rested], I say to the shepherd;
7 How is it, Sir, say I, that the building of the tower was not
completed?
8 The tower, he saith, cannot yet he fully completed, until its master
come and test this building, that if any stones be found crumbling, he
may change them;
9 for the tower is being built according to His will.
10 I would fain know, Sir, say I,
11 what is this building of this tower, and concerning the rock and
gate, and the mountains, and the virgins, and the stones that came
up from the deep, and were not shaped, hut went just as they were
into the building;
12 and wherefore ten stones were first placed in the foundations,
13 then twenty-five, then thirty-five, then forty,
14 and concerning the stones that had gone to the building and were
removed again and put away in their own place-concerning all these
things set thy soul at rest, Sir, and explain them to me.
15 If, saith he, thou be not found possessed of an idle curiosity, thou
shalt know all things.562
Codex Sinaiticus:
16 For after a few days we shall come here, and thou shalt see the
sequel that overtaketh this tower and shalt understand all the
parables accurately.
17 And after a few days we came to the place where we had sat, and
he saith to me, Let us go to the tower;
18 for the owner of the tower cometh to inspect it.
19 And we came to the tower, and there was no one at all by it, save
the virgins alone.
20 And the shepherd asked the virgins whether the master of the
tower had arrived.
21 And they said that he would be there directly to inspect the
building.
Shepherd 92
1 And, behold, after a little while I see an array of many men coming,
and in the midst a man of such lofty stature that he overtopped the
tower.
2 And the six men who superintended the building walked with him
on the right hand and on the left, and all they that worked at the
building were with him, and many other glorious attendants around
him.
3 And the virgins that watched the tower ran up and kissed him, and
they began to walk by his side round the tower.
4 And that man inspected the building so carefully, that he felt each
single stone;
5 and he held a rod in his hand and struck each single stone that was
built in.
6 And when he smote, some of the stones became black as soot,
others mildewed,
7 others cracked, others broke off short, others became neither white
nor black, others rough and not fitting in with the other stones, and
others with many spots;
8 these were the varied aspects of the stones which were found
unsound for the building.
9 So he ordered all these to be removed from the tower, and to be
placed by the side of the tower, and other stones to be brought and
put into their place.
10 And the builders asked him from what mountain he desired
stones to be brought and put into their place.
11 And he would not have them brought from the mountains, but
ordered them to be brought from a certain plain that was nigh at
hand.
12 And the plain was dug, and stones were found there bright and
square, but some of them too were round.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
563
13 And all the stones which there were anywhere in that plain were
brought every one of them, and were carried through the gate by the
virgins.
14 And the square stones were hewed, and set in the place of those
which had been removed;
15 but the round ones were not placed in the building, because they
were too hard to be shaped, and to work on them was slow.
16 So they were placed by the side of the tower, as though they were
intended to be shaped and placed in the building;
17 for they were very bright.
Shepherd 93
1 So then, having accomplished these things,
2 the glorious man who was lord of the whole tower called the
shepherd to him,
3 and delivered unto him all the stones which lay by the side of the
tower, which were cast out from the building, and saith unto him;
4 Clean these stones carefully, and set them in the building of the
tower, these, I mean, which can fit with the rest;
5 but those which will not fit, throw far away from the tower.
6 Having given these orders to the shepherd, he departed from the
tower with all those with whom he had come.
7 And the virgins stood round the tower watching it.
8 I say to the shepherd, How can these stones go again to the
building of the tower, seeing that they have been disapproved?
9 He saith unto me in answer;
10 Seest thou, saith he, these stones?
11 I see them, Sir, say I.
12 I myself, saith he, will shape the greater part of these stones and
put them into the building, and they shall fit in with the remaining
stones.
13 How, Sir, say I, can they, when they are chiseled, fill the same
space?
14 He saith unto me in answer, As many as shall be found small, shall
be put into the middle of the building;
15 but as many as are larger, shall be placed nearer the outside, and
they will bind them together.
16 With these words he saith to me, Let us go away, and after two
days let us come and clean these stones, and put them into the
building;
17 for all things round the tower must be made clean,
18 lest haply the master come suddenly and find the circuit of the
tower dirty,564
Codex Sinaiticus:
19 and he be wroth, and so these stones shall not go to the building of
the tower, and I shall appear to be careless in my masters sight.
Shepherd 94
1 And after two days we came to the tower, and he saith unto me;
2 Let us inspect all the stones, and see those which can go to the
building.
3 I say to him, Sir, let us inspect them.
4 And so commencing first we began to inspect the black stones;
5 and just as they were when set aside from the building, such also
they were found.
6 And the shepherd ordered them to be removed from the tower and
to be put on one side.
7 Then he inspected those that were mildewed, and he took and
shaped many of them, and ordered the virgins to take them up and
put them into the building.
8 And the virgins took them up and placed them in the building of
the tower in a middle position.
9 But the rest he ordered to be placed with the black ones;
10 for these also were found black.
11 Then he began to inspect those that had the cracks;
12 and of these he shaped many, and he ordered them to be carried
away by the hands of the virgins for the building.
13 And they were placed towards the outside, because they were
found to be sounder.
14 But the rest could not be shaped owing to the number of the
cracks.
15 For this reason therefore they were cast aside front the building of
the tower.
16 Then he proceeded to inspect the stunted (stones), and many
among them were found black, and some had contracted great
cracks;
17 and he ordered these also to be placed with those that had been
cast aside.
18 But those of them which remained he cleaned and shaped, and
ordered to he placed in the building.
19 So the virgins took them up, and fitted them into the middle of the
building of the tower;
20 for they were somewhat weak.
21 Then he began to inspect those that were half white and half black,
and many of them were (now) found black;
22 and he ordered these also to be taken up with those that had been
cast aside.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
565
23 *But all the rest were [found white, and were] taken up by the
virgins;
24 for being white they were fitted by [the virgins] them[selves] into
the building.
25 *But they were placed towards the outside, because they were
found sound, so that they could hold together those that were placed
in the middle;
26 for not a single one of them was too short.
27 Then he began to inspect the hard and rough;
28 and a few of them were cast away, because they could not be
shaped;
29 for they were found very hard.
30 But the rest of them were shaped [and taken up by the virgins]
and fitted into the middle of the building of the tower;
31 for they were somewhat weak.
32 Then he proceeded to inspect those that had the spots, and of
these some few had turned black and were cast away among the rest;
33 but the remainder were found bright and sound, and these were
fitted by the virgins into the building;
34 but they were placed towards the outside, owing to their strength.
Shepherd 95
1 Then he came to inspect the white and round stones, and he saith
unto me;
2 What shall we do with these stones?
3 How do I know, Sir?
4 say I.
5 [And he saith to me,] Perceivest thou nothing concerning them?
6 I, Sir, say I, do not possess this art, neither am I a mason, nor can I
understand.
7 Seest thou not, saith he, that they are very round;
8 and if I wish to make them square, very much must needs be
chiseled off from them?
9 Yet some of them must of necessity be placed into the building.
10 If then, Sir, say I, it must needs be so, why distress thyself, and
why not choose out for the building those thou willest, and fit them
into it?
11 He chose out from them the large and the bright ones, and shaped
them;
12 and the virgins took them up, and fitted them into the outer parts
of the building.566
Codex Sinaiticus:
13 But the rest, which remained over, were taken up, and put aside
into the plain whence they were brought;
14 they were not however cast away, Because, saith he, there
remaineth still a little of the tower to be builded.
15 And the master of the tower is exceedingly anxious that these
stones be fitted into the building, for they are very bright.
16 So twelve women were called, most beautiful in form, clad in
black, [girded about and having the shoulders bare,] with their hair
hanging loose.
17 And these women, me thought, had a savage look.
18 And the shepherd ordered them to take up the stones which had
been cast away from the building, and to carry them off to the same
mountains from which also they had been brought;
19 and they took them up joyfully, and carried away all the stones
and put them in the place whence they had been taken.
20 And after all the stones had been taken up, and not a single stone
still lay round the tower, the shepherd saith unto me;
21 Let us go round the tower, and see that there is no defect in it.
22 And I proceeded to go round it with him.
23 And when the shepherd saw that the tower was very comely in the
building, he was exceedingly glad;
24 for the tower was so well builded, that when I saw it I coveted the
building of it ;
25 for it was builded, as it were, of one stone, having one fitting in it.
26 And the stone-work appeared as if hewn out of the rock;
27 for it seemed to be all a single stone.
Shepherd 96
1 And I, as I walked with him, was glad to see so brave a sight.
2 And the shepherd saith to me Go and bring plaster and fine clay,
that I may fill up the shapes of the stones that have been taken up
and put into the building;
3 for all the circuit of the tower must be made smooth.
4 And I did is he bade, and brought them to him.
5 Assist me, saith he, and the work will speedily be accomplished.
6 So he filled in the shapes of the stones which had gone to the
building, and ordered the circuit of the tower to be swept and made
clean.
7 And the virgins took brooms and swept, and they removed all the
rubbish from the tower, and sprinkled water, and the site of the
tower was made cheerful and very seemly.
8 The shepherd saith unto me, All, saith he, hath now been cleaned.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
567
9 If the lord come to inspect the tower, he hath nothing for which to
blame us.
10 Saying this, he desired to go away.
11 But I caught hold of his wallet, and began to adjure him by the
Lord that he would explain to me [all] what he had showed me.
12 He saith to me;
13 I am busy for a little while, and then I will explain everything to
thee.
14 Await me here till I come.
15 I say to him;
16 Sir, when I am here alone what shall I do?
17 Thou art not alone, saith he;
18 for these virgins are here with thee. Commend me then to them,
say I.
19 The shepherd calleth them to him and saith to them;
20 I commend this man to you till I come, and he departed.
21 So I was alone with the virgins;
22 and they were most cheerful, and kindly disposed to me,
especially the four of them that were the more glorious in
appearance.
Shepherd 97
1 The virgins say to me;
2 Today the shepherd cometh not here.
3 What then shall I do? say I.
4 Stay for him, say they, till eventide;
5 and if he come, he will speak with thee;
6 but if he come not, thou shalt stay here with us till he cometh.
7 I say to them;
8 I will await him till evening, and if he come not, I will depart home
and return early in the morning.
9 But they answered and said unto me;
10 To us thou wast entrusted;
11 thou canst not depart from us.
12 Where then, say I, shall I remain?
13 “Thou shalt pass the night with us, say they, as a brother, not as a
husband;
14 for thou art our brother, and hence-forward we will dwell with
thee;
15 for we love thee dearly.
16 But I was ashamed to abide with them.568
Codex Sinaiticus:
17 And she that seemed to be the chief of them began to kiss and to
embrace me;
18 and the others seeing her embrace me, they too began to kiss me,
and to lead me round the tower, and to sport with me.
19 And I had become as it were a younger man, and I commenced
myself likewise to sport with them.
20 For some of them began to dance, [others to skip,] others to sing.
21 But I kept silence and walked with them round the tower, and was
glad with them.
22 But when evening came I wished to go away home;
23 but they would not let me go, but detained me.
24 And I stayed the nigh with them, and I slept by the side of the
tower.
25 For the virgins spread their linen tunics on the ground, and made
me lie down in the midst of them, and they did nothing else but pray;
26 and I prayed with them without ceasing, and not less than they.
27 And the virgins rejoiced that I so prayed.
28 And I stayed there with the virgins until the morning till the
second hour.
29 Then came the shepherd, and saith to the virgins;
30 Have ye done him any injury?
31 Ask him, say they.
32 I say to him, Sir, I was rejoiced to stay with them.
33 On what didst thou sup? saith he.
34 I supped, Sir, say I, on the words of the Lord the whole nigh
through.
35 Did they treat thee well? saith he.
36 Yes, Sir, say I.
37 Now, saith he, what wouldest thou hear first?
38 In the order as thou showedst to me, Sir, from the beginning, say
I;
39 I request thee, Sir, to explain to me exactly in the order that I shall
enquire of thee.
Shepherd 98
1 First of all, Sir, say I, explain this to me.
2 The rock and the How, Sir, say I, is the rock ancient, but the gate
recent?
3 Listen, saith he, and understand, foolish man.
4 The Son of God is older than all His creation, so that He became
the Fathers adviser in His creation.
5 Therefore also He is ancient.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
569
6 But the gate, why is it recent, Sir? say I.
7 Because, saith he, He was made manifest in the last days of the
consummation;
8 therefore the gate was made recent, that they which are to be saved
may enter through it into the kingdom of God.
9 Didst thou see, saith he,
10 that the stones which came through the gate have gone to the
building of the tower, but those which came not through it were cast
away again to their own place?
11 I saw, Sir, say I.
12 “Thus, saith he, no one shall enter into the kingdom of God, except
he receive the name of His Son.
13 For if thou wishest to enter into any city, and that city is walled all
round and has one gate only, canst thou enter into that city except
through the gate which it hath?
14 Why, how, Sir, say I, is it possible otherwise?
15 If then thou canst not enter into the city except through the gate
itself, even so, saith he, a man cannot enter into the kingdom of God
except by the name of His Son that is beloved by Him.
16 Didst thou see, saith he, the multitude that is building the tower?
17 I saw it, Sir, say I.
18 They, saith he, are all glorious angels.
19 With these then the Lord is walled around.
20 But the gate is the Son of God;
21 there is this one entrance only to the Lord.
22 No one then shall enter in unto Him otherwise than through His
Son.
23 Didst thou see, saith he, the six men, and the glorious and mighty
man in the midst of them, him that walked about the tower and
rejected the stones from the building?
24 I saw him, Sir, say I.
25 The glorious man, saith he, is the Son of God, and those six are the
glorious angels who guard Him on the right hand and on the left.
26 Of these glorious angels not one, saith he, shall enter in unto God
without Him;
Shepherd 99
1 But the tower, say I, what is it?
2 “The tower, saith he, why, this is the Church.
3 And these virgins, who are they?
4 They, saith he, are unless these shall clothe him with their garment;570
Codex Sinaiticus:
5 for if thou receive only the name, but receive not the garment from
them, thou profitest nothing.
6 For these virgins are powers of the Son of God.
7 If [therefore] thou bear the Name, and bear not His power, thou
shalt bear His Name to none effect.
8 And the stones, saith he, which thou didst see cast away, these bare
the Name, but clothed not themselves with the raiment of the virgins.
9 Of what sort, Sir, say I, is their raiment?
10 “The names themselves, saith he, are their raiment.
11 Whosoever beareth the Name of the Son of God, ought to bear the
names of these also;
12 for even the Son Himself beareth the names of these virgins.
13 As many stones, saith he, as thou sawest enter into the building of
the tower, being given in by their hands and waiting for the building,
they have been clothed in the power of these virgins.
14 For this cause thou seest the tower made a single stone with the
rock.
15 So also they that have believed in the Lord through His Son and
clothe themselves in these spirits, shall become one spirit and one
body, and their garments all of one colour.
16 But such persons as bear the names of the virgins have their
dwelling in the tower.
17 The stones then, Sir, say I, which are cast aside, wherefore were
they cast aside?
18 For they passed through the gate and were placed in the building
of the tower by the hands of the virgins.
19 Since all these things interest thee, saith he, and thou enquirest
diligently, listen as touching the stones that have been cast aside.
20 These all, [saith he,] received the name of the Son of God, and
received likewise the power of these virgins.
21 When then they received these spirits, they were strengthened,
and were with the servants of God, and they had one spirit and one
body [and one garment];
22 for they had the same mind, and they wrought righteousness.
23 After a certain time then they were persuaded by the women
whom thou sawest clad in black raiment, and having their shoulders
bare and their hair loose, and beautiful in form.
24 When they saw them they desired them, and they clothed
themselves with their power, but they stripped off from themselves
the power of the virgins.
25 They then were cast away from the house of God, and delivered to
these (women).The H. T. Anderson New Testament
571
Shepherd 100
1 What then, Sir, say I, if these men, being such as they are, should
repent and put away their desire for these women, and return unto
the virgins, and walk in their power and in their works?
2 Shall they not enter into the house of God?
3 They shall enter, saith he, if they shall put away the works of these
women, and take again the power of the virgins, and walk in their
works.
4 For this is the reason why there was also a cessation in the
building, that, if these repent, they may go into the building of the
tower;
5 but if they repent not, then others will go, and these shall be cast
away finally.
6 For all these things I gave thanks unto the Lord, because He had
compassion on all that called upon His name,
7 and sent forth the angel of repentance to us that had sinned against
Him, and refreshed our spirit, and, when we were already ruined and
had no hope of life, restored our life.
8 Now, Sir, say I, show me why the tower is not built upon the
ground, but upon the rock and upon the gate.
9 Because thou art senseless, saith he, and without understanding
[thou askest the question].
10 I am obliged, Sir, say I, to ask all questions of thee, because I am
absolutely unable to comprehend anything at all;
11 for all are great and glorious and difficult for men to understand.
12 Listen, saith he.
13 The name of the Son of God is great and incomprehensible, and
sustaineth the whole world.
14 If then all creation is sustained by the Son [of God], what thinkest
thou of those that are called by Him, and bear the name of the Son of
God, and walk according to His commandments?
15 Seest thou then what manner of men He sustaineth?
16 Even those that bear His name with their whole heart.
Shepherd 101
1 Declare to me, Sir, say I, the names of the virgins, and of the of the
more powerful virgins, those that are stationed at the corners.
2 The first is Faith, and the second, Continence, and the third, Power,
and the fourth, Longsuffering.
3 But the others stationed between them have these names
Simplicity,
Guilelessness,
Purity,
Cheerfulness,
Truth,
Understanding, Concord, Love.572
Codex Sinaiticus:
4 He that beareth these names and the name of the Son of God shall
be able to enter into the kingdom of God.
5 Hear, saith he, likewise the names of the women that wear the
black garments.
6 Of these also four are more powerful than the rest;
7 the first is Unbelief;
8 the second, Intemperance;
9 the third, Disobedience;
10 the fourth, Deceit;
11 and their followers are called, Sadness, Wickedness, Wantonness,
Irascibility, Falsehood, Folly, Slander, Hatred.
12 The servant of God that beareth these names shall see the
kingdom of God, but shall not enter into it.
13 But the stones, Sir, say I, that came from the deep, and were fitted
into the building, who are they?
14 “The first, saith he, even the ten, that were placed in the
foundations, are the first generation;
15 the twenty-five are the second generation of righteous men;
16 the thirty-five are Gods prophets and His ministers;
17 the forty are apostles and teachers of the preaching of the Son of
God.
18 Wherefore then, Sir, say I, did the virgins give in these stones also
for the building of the tower and carry them through the gate?
19 “ Because these first, saith he,
20 bore these spirits, and they never separated the one from the
other, neither the spirits from the men nor the men from the spirits,
but the spirits abode with them till they fell asleep;
Shepherd 102
1 Show me still further, Sir, say I.
2 What desirest thou to know the deep, and wherefore were they
placed into the building, though they bore these spirits?
3 “It was necessary for them, saith he, to rise up through water, that
they might be made alive;
4 for otherwise they could not enter into the kingdom of God, except
they had put aside the deadness of their [former] life.
5 So these likewise that had fallen asleep received the seal of the Son
of God and entered into the kingdom of God.
6 For before a man, saith he, has borne the name of [the Son of] God,
he is dead;
7 but when he has received the seal, he layeth aside his deadness, and
resumeth life.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
573
8 The seal then is the water so they go down into the water dead, and
they come up alive.
9 Thus to them also this seal was preached, and they availed
themselves of it that they might enter into the kingdom of God.
10 Wherefore, Sir, say I, did the forty stones also come up with them
from the deep, though they had already received the seal?
11 Because, saith he,
12 these, the apostles and the teachers who preached the name of the
Son of God, after they had fallen asleep in the power and faith of the
Son of God,
13 preached also to then that had fallen asleep before them, and
themselves gave unto them the seal of the preaching.
14 Therefore they went down with them into the water, and came up
again.
15 But these went down alive [and again came up alive];
16 whereas the others that had fallen asleep before them went down
dead and came up alive.
17 So by their means they were quickened into life, and came to the
full knowledge of the name of the Son of God.
18 For this cause also they came up with them, and were fitted with
them into the building of the tower and were builded with them,
without being shaped;
19 for they fell asleep in righteousness and in great purity.
20 Only they had not this seal.
21 Thou hast then the interpretation of these things also.
22 I have, Sir, say I.
Shepherd 103
1 Now then, Sir, explain to me concerning the mountains.
2 Wherefore are their forms diverse the one from the other, and
various?
3 Listen, saith he.
4 These twelve mountains are [twelve] tribes that inhabit the whole
world.
5 To these (tribes) then the Son of God was preached by the Apostles.
6 But explain to me, Sir, why they are various-these mountains-and
each has a different appearance.
7 Listen, saith he.
8 These twelve tribes which inhabit the whole world are twelve
nations;
9 and they are various in understanding and in mind.574
Codex Sinaiticus:
10 As various, then, as thou sawest these mountains to be, such also
are the varieties in the mind of these nations, and such their
understanding.
11 And I will show unto thee the conduct of each.
12 First, Sir, say I,
13 show me this, why the mountains being so various, yet,
14 when their stones were set into the building, became bright and of
one colour, just like the stones that had come up from the deep.
15 Because, saith he, all the nations that dwell under heaven, when
they heard and believed, were called by the one name of [the Son of]
God.
16 So having received the seal, they had one understanding and one
mind, and one faith became theirs and [one] love, and they bore the
spirits of the virgins along with the Name;
17 therefore the building of the tower became of one colour, even
bright as the sun.
18 But after they entered in together, and became one body, some of
them defiled themselves, and were cast out from the society of the
righteous, and became again such as they were before, or rather even
worse.
Shepherd 104
1 How, Sir, say I, did they become worse, after they had fully known
God?
2 He that knoweth not God, saith he, and committeth wickedness,
hath a certain punishment for his wickedness;
3 but he that knoweth God fully ought not any longer to commit
wickedness, but to do good.
4 If then he that ought to do good committeth wickedness, does he
not seem to do greater wickedness than the man that knoweth not
God?
5 Therefore they that have not known God, and commit wickedness,
are condemned to death;
6 but they that have known God and seen His mighty works, and yet
commit wickedness, shall receive a double punishment, and shall die
eternally.
7 In this way therefore shall the Church of God be purified.
8 And as thou sawest the stones removed from the tower and
delivered over to the evil spirits, they too shall be cast out;
9 and there shall be one body of them that are purified, just as the
tower, after it had been purified, became made as it were of one
stone.
10 Thus shall it be with the Church of God also, after she hath been
purified, and the wicked and hypocrites and blasphemers andThe H. T. Anderson New Testament
575
double-minded and they that commit various kinds of wickedness
have been cast out.
11 When these have been cast out, the Church of God shall be one
body, one understanding, one mind, one faith, one love.
12 And then the Son of God shall rejoice and be glad in them, for that
He hath received back His people pure.
13 Great and glorious, Sir, say I, are all these things.
14 Once more, Sir, [say I,] show me the force and the doings of each
one of the mountains, that every soul that trusteth in the Lord, when
it heareth, may glorify His great and marvelous and glorious name.
15 Listen, saith he, to the variety of the mountains and of the twelve
nations.
Shepherd 105
1 From the first mountain, which was black, they that have believed
are such as these;
2 rebels and blasphemers against the Lord, and betrayers of the
servants of God.
3 For these there is no repentance, but there is death.
4 For this cause also they are black;
5 for their race is lawless.
6 And from the second mountain, the bare one, they that believed are
such as these;
7 hypocrites and teachers of wickedness.
8 And these then are like the former it not having the fruit of
righteousness.
9 For, even as their mountain is unfruitful, so likewise such men as
these have a name indeed, but they are void of the faith, and there is
no fruit of truth in them.
10 For these then repentance is offered, if they repent quickly;
11 but if they delay, they will have their death with the former.
12 Wherefore, Sir, say I, is repentance possible for them, but not for
the former?
13 For their doings are almost the same.
14 On this account, he saith, is repentance offered for them, because
they blasphemed not their Lord, nor became betrayers of the
servants of God;
15 yet from desire of gain they played the hypocrite, and taught each
other [after] the desires of sinful men.
16 But they shall pay a certain penalty;
17 yet repentance is ordained for them, because they are not become
blasphemers or betrayers.576
Codex Sinaiticus:
Shepherd 106
1 And from the third mountain, which had thorns and briars, they
that believed are such as these;
2 some of them are wealthy and others are entangled in many
business affairs.
3 The briars are the wealthy, and the thorns are they that are mixed
up in various business affairs.
4 These [then,that are mixed up in many and various business
affairs,] cleave [not] to the servants of God, but go astray, being
choked by their affairs,
5 but the wealthy unwillingly cleave to the servants of God, fearing
lest they may be asked for something by them.
6 Such men therefore shall hardly enter into the kingdom of God.
7 For as it is difficult to walk on briars with bare feet, so also it is
difficult for such men to enter into the kingdom of God.
8 But for all these repentance is possible, but it must be speedy, that
in respect to what they omitted to do in the former times, they may
now revert to (past) days, and do some good.
9 If then they shall repent and do some good, they shall live unto
God;
10 but if they continue in their doings, they shall be delivered over to
those women, the which shall put them to death.
Shepherd 107
1 And from the fourth mountain, which had much vegetation, the
upper part of the grass green and the part towards the roots
withered, and some of it dried up by the sun, they that believed are
such as these;
2 the double-minded, and they that have the Lord on their lips, but
have Him not in their heart.
3 Therefore their foundations are dry and without power, and their
words only live, but their works are dead.
4 Such men are neither alive nor dead.
5 They are, therefore, like unto the double-minded;
6 for the double-minded are neither green nor withered;
7 for they are neither alive nor dead.
8 For as their grass was withered up then it saw the sun, so also the
double-minded, when they hear of tribulation, through their
cowardice worship idols and are ashamed of the name of their Lord.
9 Such are neither alive nor dead.
10 Yet these also, if they repent quickly, shall be able to live;
11 but if they repent not, they are delivered over already to the
women who deprive them of their life.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
577
Shepherd 108
1 And from the fifth mountain, which had green grass and was
rugged, they that believed are such as these;
2 they are faithful, but slow to learn and stubborn and self-pleasers,
desiring to know all things, and yet they know nothing at all.
3 By reason of this their stubbornness, understanding stood aloof
from them, and a foolish senselessness entered into them;
4 and they praise themselves as having understanding, and they
desire to be self-appointed teachers, senseless though they are.
5 Owing then to this pride of heart many, while they exalted
themselves, have been made empty;
6 for a mighty demon is stubbornness and vain confidence.
7 Of these then many were cast away, but some repented and
believed, and submitted themselves to those that had understanding,
having learnt their own senselessness.
8 Yea, and to the rest that belong to this class repentance is offered;
9 for they did not become wicked, but rather foolish and without
understanding.
10 If these then shall repent, they shall live unto God;
11 but if they repent not, they shall have their abode with the women
who work evil against them.
Shepherd 109
1 But they that believed from the sixth mountain, which had clefts
great and small, and in the clefts herbage withered, are such as these;
2 they that have the small clefts, these are they that have aught
against one another, and from their backbitings they are withered in
the faith;
3 but many of these repented.
4 Yea, and the rest shall repent, when they hear my commandments;
5 for their backbitings are but small, and they shall quickly repent.
6 But they that have great clefts, these are persistent in their
backbitings and bear grudges, nursing wrath against one another.
7 These then were thrown right away from the tower and rejected
from its building.
8 Such persons therefore shall with difficulty live.
9 If God and our Lord, Who ruleth over all things and hath the
authority over all His creation, beareth no grudge against them that
confess their sins, but is propitiated,
10 doth man, who is mortal and full of sins, bear a grudge against
man, as though he were able to destroy or save him?578
Codex Sinaiticus:
11 I say unto you: I, the angel of repentance unto as many as hold this
heresy, put it away from you and repent, and the Lord shall heal your
former sins, if ye shall purify yourselves from this demon;
12 but if not, ye shall be delivered unto him to be put to death.
Shepherd 110
1 And from the seventh mountain, on which was herbage green and
smiling, and the whole mountain thriving,
2 and cattle of every kind and the fowls of heaven were feeding on the
herbage on that mountain, and the green herbage, on which they fed,
only grew the more luxuriant, they that believed are such as these;
3 they were ever simple and guileless and blessed, having nothing
against one another,
4 but rejoicing always in the servants of God, and clothed in the Holy
Spirit of these virgins, and having compassion always on every man,
and out of their labours they supplied every mans need without
reproach and without misgiving.
5 The Lord then seeing their simplicity and entire childliness made
them to abound in the labours of their hands, and bestowed favour
on them in all their doings.
6 But I say unto you that are such-I, the angel of repentance-remain
to the end such as ye are, and your seed shall never be blotted out.
7 For the Lord hath put you to the proof, and enrolled you among our
number, and your whole seed shall dwell with the Son of God;
8 for of His Spirit did ye receive.
Shepherd 111
1 And from the eighth mountain, where were the many springs, and
all the creatures of the Lord did drink of the springs, they that
believed are such as these;
2 apostles and teachers, who preached unto the whole world, and
who taught the word of the Lord in soberness and purity,
3 and kept back no part at all for evil desire, but walked always in
righteousness and truth, even as also they received the Holy Spirit.
4 Such therefore shall have their entrance with the angels.
Shepherd 112
1 And from the ninth mountain, which was desert, which had [the]
reptiles and wild beasts in it which destroy mankind, they that
believed are such as these;
2 they that have the spots are deacons that exercised their office ill,
and plundered the livelihood of widows and orphans, and made gainThe H. T. Anderson New Testament
579
for themselves from the ministrations which they had received to
perform.
3 If then they abide in the same evil desire, they are dead and there is
no hope of life for them;
4 but if they turn again and fulfil their ministrations in purity, it shall
be possible for them to live.
5 But they that are mildewed, these are they that denied and turned
not again unto their Lord, but having become barren and desert,
because they cleave not unto the servants of God but remain alone,
they destroy their own souls.
6 For as a vine left alone in a hedge, if it meet with neglect, is
destroyed and wasted by the weeds,
7 and in time becometh wild and is no longer useful to its owner, so
also men of this kind have given themselves up in despair and
become useless to their Lord, by growing wild.
8 To these then repentance cometh, unless they be found to have
denied from the heart;
9 but if a man be found to have denied from the heart, I know not
whether it is possible for him to live.
10 And this I say not in reference to these days, that a man after
denying should receive repentance;
11 for it is impossible for him to be saved who shall now deny his
Lord;
12 but for those who denied Him long ago repentance seemeth to be
possible.
13 If a man therefore will repent, let him do so speedily before the
tower is completed;
14 but if not, he shall he destroyed by the women and put to death.
15 And the stunted, these are the treacherous and backbiters;
16 and the wild beasts which thou sawest on the mountain are these.
17 For as wild beasts with their venom poison and kill a man, so also
do the words of such men poison and kill a man.
18 These then are broken off short from their faith through the
conduct which they have in themselves;
19 but some of them repented and were saved;
20 and the rest that are of this kind can be saved, if they repent;
21 but if they repent not, they shall meet their death from those
women of whose power they are possessed.
Shepherd 113
1 And from the tenth mountain, where were trees sheltering certain
sheep, they that believed are such as these;580
Codex Sinaiticus:
2 bishops, hospitable persons, who gladly received into their houses
at all times the servants of God without hypocrisy.
3 [These bishops] at all times without ceasing sheltered the needy
and the widows in their ministration and conducted themselves in
purity at all times.
4 These [all] then shall be sheltered by the Lord for ever.
5 They therefore that have done these things are glorious in the sight
of God, and their place is even now with the angels, if they shall
continue unto the end serving the Lord.
Shepherd 114
1 And from the eleventh mountain, where were trees full of fruit,
decked with divers kinds of fruits, they that believed are such as
these;
2 they that suffered for the Name [of the Son of God], who also
suffered readily with their whole heart, and yielded up their lives.
3 Wherefore then, Sir, say I, have all the trees fruits, but some of
their fruits are more beautiful than others?
4 Listen, saith he;
5 all as many as ever suffered for the Names sake are glorious in the
sight of God,
6 and the sins of all these were taken away, because they suffered for
the name of the Son of God.
7 Now hear why their fruits are various, and some surpassing others.
8 As many, saith he, as were tortured and denied not, when brought
before the magistracy, but suffered readily, these are the more
glorious in the sight of the Lord;
9 their fruit is that which surpasseth.
10 But as many as became cowards, and were lost in uncertainty,
11 and considered in their hearts whether they should deny or
confess,
12 and yet suffered, their fruits are less, because this design entered
into their heart for this design is evil, that a servant should deny his
own lord.
13 See to it, therefore, ye who entertain this idea, lest this design
remain in your hearts, and ye die unto God.
14 But ye that suffer for the Names sake ought to glorify God,
because God deemed you worthy that ye should bear this name, and
that all your sins should be healed.
15 Reckon yourselves blessed therefore;
16 yea, rather think that ye have done a great work, if any of you shall
suffer for Gods sake.
17 The Lord bestoweth life upon you, and ye perceive it not;The H. T. Anderson New Testament
581
18 for your sins weighed you down, and if ye had not suffered for the
Name [of the Lord], ye had died unto God by reason of your sins.
19 These things I say unto you that waver as touching denial and
confession.
20 Confess that ye have the Lord, last denying Him ye be delivered
into prison.
21 If the Gentiles punish their slaves, if any one deny his lord, what
think ye the Lord will do unto you, He Who hath the authority over
all things?
22 Away with these designs from your hearts, that ye may live for
ever unto God.
Shepherd 115
1 And from the twelfth mountain, which was white, they that believed
are such as these;
2 they are as very babes, into whose heart no guile entereth, neither
learnt they what wickedness is, but they remained as babes for ever.
3 Such as these then dwell without doubt in the kingdom of God,
because they defiled the commandments of God in nothing, but
continued as babes all the days of their life in the same mind.
4 As many of you therefore as shall so continue, saith he, and shall be
as infants not having guile, shall be more glorious [even] than all
them that have been mentioned before;
5 for all infants are glorious in the sight of God, and stand first in His
sight.
6 Blessed then are ye, as many as have put away wickedness from
you, and have clothed yourselves in guilelessness:
Shepherd 116
1 After he had finished the parables of the mountains, I say unto him,
2 Sir, now explain to me concerning the stones that were taken from
the from the tower, and concerning the round (stones) which were
placed in the building, and concerning those that were still round.
Shepherd 117
1 Hear, saith he, likewise concerning all these things.
2 The stones which were taken from the plain and placed in the
building of the tower in the room of those that were rejected, are the
roots of this white mountain.
3 When then they that believed from this mountain were all found
guileless, the lord of the tower ordered these from the roots of this
mountain to be put into the building of the tower.582
Codex Sinaiticus:
4 For He knew that if these stones should go to the building [of the
tower], they would remain bright and not one of then would turn
black.
5 But if he had added (stones) from the other mountains, he would
have been obliged to visit that tower again, and to purify it.
6 Now all these have been found white, who have believed and who
shall believe;
7 for they are of the same kind.
8 Blessed is this kind, for it is innocent! Hear now likewise
concerning those round and bright stones.
9 All these are from this white mountain.
10 Now hear wherefore they have been found round.
11 Their riches have darkened and obscured them a little from the
truth, yet they never departed from God, nor did any evil word
proceed from their mouth, but all equity and virtue which comes
from the truth.
12 When therefore the Lord perceived their mind, that they could
favour the truth, *and likewise remain good,
13 He commanded their possessions to be cut from off them, yet not
to be taken away altogether, so that they might be able to do some
good with that which hath been left to them, and might live unto
God, for that they come of a good kind.
14 So therefore they have been cut away a little, and placed in the
building of this tower.
Shepherd 118
1 But the other (stones), which have remained round and have not
been fitted into the building, because they have not yet received the
seal, have been replaced in their own position, for they were found
very round.
2 For this world and the vanities of their possessions must be cut
from off them, and then they will fit into the kingdom of God.
3 For it is necessary that they should enter into the kingdom of God;
4 because the Lord hath blessed this innocent kind.
5 Of this kind then not one shall perish.
6 Yea, even though any one of them being tempted by the most
wicked devil have committed any fault, he shall return speedily unto
his Lord.
7 Blessed I pronounce you all to be-I, the angel of repentance-
whoever of you are guileless as infants, because your part is good and
honourable in the sight of God.
8 Moreover I bid all of you, whoever have received this seal, keep
guilelessness, and bear to grudge, and continue not in your
wickedness nor in the memory of the offences of bitterness;The H. T. Anderson New Testament
583
9 but become of one spirit, and heal these evil clefts and take them
away from among you, that the owner of the flocks may rejoice
concerning them.
10 For he will rejoice, if he find all things whole.
11 But if he find any part of the flock scattered, woe unto the
shepherds.
12 For if the shepherds themselves shall have been found scattered,
how will they answer for the flocks?
13 Will they say that they were harassed by the flock?
14 No credence will be given them.
15 For it is an incredible thing that a shepherd should be injured by
his flock;
16 and he will be punished the more because of his falsehood.
17 And I am the shepherd, and it behoveth me most strongly to
render an account for you.
Shepherd 119
1 Amend yourselves therefore, while the tower is still in course of
building.
2 The Lord dwelleth in men that love peace;
3 for to Him peace is dear;
4 but from the contentious and them that are given up to wickedness
He keepeth afar off.
5 Restore therefore to Him your spirit whole as ye received it.
6 For suppose thou hast given to a fuller a new garment whole, and
desirest to receive it back again whole, but the fuller give it back to
thee torn, wilt thou receive it thus?
7 Wilt thou not at once blaze out and attack him with reproaches,
saying;
8 “The garment which I gave thee was whole;
9 wherefore hast thou rent it and made it useless?
10 See, by reason of the rent, which thou hast made in it, it cannot be
of use.”
11 Wilt thou not then say all this to a fuller even about a rent which
he has made in thy garment?
12 If therefore thou art thus vexed in the matter of thy garment, and
complainest because thou receivest it not back whole,
13 what thinkest thou the Lord will do to thee, He, Who gave thee the
spirit whole, and thou hast made it absolutely useless, so that it
cannot be of any use at all to its Lord?
14 For its use began to be useless, when it was corrupted by thee.
15 Will not therefore the Lord of this spirit for this thy deed punish
[thee with death]?584
Codex Sinaiticus:
16 “Certainly, I said, all those, whomsoever He shall find continuing
to bear malice, He will punish.
17 Trample not, said he, upon His mercy, but rather glorify Him,
because He is so long-suffering with your sins, and is not like unto
you.
18 Practise then repentance which is expedient for you.
Shepherd 120
1 All these things which are written above I, the shepherd, the angel
of repentance, have declared and spoken to the servants of God.
2 If then ye shall believe and hear my words, and walk in them, and
amend your ways, ye shall be able to live.
3 But if ye continue in wickedness and in bearing malice, no one of
this kind shall live unto God.
4 All things which were to be spoken by me have (now) been spoken
to you.
5 The shepherd said to me, Hast thou asked me all thy questions?
6 And I said, Yes, Sir.
7 Why then hast thou not enquired of me concerning the shape of the
stones placed in the building, in that we filled up their shapes?
8 And I said, I forgot, Sir.
9 Listen now, said he, concerning them.
10 These are they that have heard my commandments now, and have
practised repentance with their whole heart.
11 So when the Lord saw that their repentance was good and pure,
and that they could continue therein, he ordered their former sins to
be blotted out.
12 These shapes then were their former sins, and they have been
chiseled away that they might not appear.
Shepherd 121
1 PARABLE THE TENTH.
2 After I had written out this book completely, the angel who had
delivered me to the shepherd came to the house where I was, and sat
upon a couch, and the shepherd stood at his right hand.
3 Then he called me, and spake thus unto me;
4 I delivered thee, said he, and thy house to this shepherd, that thou
mightest be protected by him.
5 True, Sir, I said.
6 If therefore, said he, thou desirest to be protected from all
annoyance and all cruelty,The H. T. Anderson New Testament
585
7 to have also success in every good work and word, and all the power
of righteousness, walk in his commandments, which I have given
thee, and thou shalt be able to get the mastery over all wickedness.
8 For if thou keep his commandments, all evil desire and the
sweetness of this world shall be subject unto thee;
9 moreover success shall attend thee in every good undertaking.
10 Embrace his gravity and self-restraint, and tell it out unto all men
that he is held in great honour and dignity with the Lord, and is a
ruler of great authority, and powerful in his office.
11 To him alone in the whole world hath authority over repentance
been assigned.
12 Seemeth he to thee to be powerful?
13 Yet ye despise the gravity and moderation which he useth towards
you.
Shepherd 122
1 I say unto him;
2 Ask him, Sir, himself, whether from the time that he hath been in
my house, I have done ought out of order, whereby I have offended
him.
3 I myself know, said he, that thou hast done nothing out of order,
nor art about to do so.
4 And so I speak these things unto thee, that thou mayest persevere.
5 For he hath given a good account of thee unto me.
6 Thou therefore shalt speak these words to others, that they too who
have practised or shall practise repentance may be of the same mind
as thou art;
7 and he may give a good report of then to me, and I unto the Lord.
8 I too, Sir, I say, declare to every man the mighty works of the Lord;
9 for I hope that all who have sinned in the past, if they hear these
things, will gladly repent and recover life.
10 Continue therefore, said he, in this ministry, and complete it unto
the end.
11 For whosoever fulfil his commandments shall have life;
12 yea such a man (shall have) great honour with the Lord.
13 But whosoever keep not his commandments, fly from their life,
and oppose him, and follow not his commandments, but deliver
themselves over to death;
14 and each one becometh guilty of his own blood.
15 But I bid thee obey these commandments, and thou shalt have a
remedy for thy sins.
Shepherd 123586
Codex Sinaiticus:
1 Moreover, I have sent these virgins unto thee, that they may dwell
with thee;
2 for I have seen that they are friendly towards thee.
3 Thou hast them therefore as helpers, that thou mayest be the better
able to keep his commandments;
4 for it is impossible that these commandments be kept without the
help of these virgins.
5 I see too that they are glad to be with thee.
6 But I will charge them that they depart not at all from thy house.
7 Only do thou purify thy house;
8 for in a clean house they will gladly dwell.
9 For they are clean and chaste and industrious, and all have favour
in the sight of the Lord.
10 If, therefore, they shall find thy house pure, they will continue
with thee;
11 but if the slightest pollution arise, they will depart from thy house
at once.
12 For these virgins love not pollution in any form.
13 I say unto him, I hope, Sir, that I shall please them, so that they
may gladly dwell in my house for ever;
14 and just as he to whom thou didst deliver me maketh no
complaint against me, so they likewise shall make no complaint.
15 He saith unto the shepherd, I perceive, saith he, that he wishes to
live as the servant of God, and that he will keep these
commandments, and will place these virgins in a clean habitation.
16 With these words he again delivered me over to the shepherd, and
called the virgins, and said to them;
17 Inasmuch as I see that ye are glad to dwell in this mans house, I
commend to you him and his house, that ye depart not at all from his
house.
18 But they heard these words gladly.
Shepherd 124
1 He said then to me, Quit you like a man in this ministry;
2 declare to every man the mighty works of the Lord, and thou shalt
have favour in this ministry.
3 Whosoever therefore shall walk in these commandments, shall live
and be happy in his life;
4 but whosoever shall neglect them, shall not live, and shall be
unhappy in his life.
5 Charge all men who are able to do right, that they cease not to
practise good works;
6 for it is useful for them.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
587
7 I say moreover that every man ought to be rescued from
misfortune;
8 for he that hath need, and suffereth misfortune in his daily life, is
in great torment and want.
9 Whosoever therefore rescueth from penury a life of this kind,
10 winneth great joy for himself For he who is harassed by
misfortune of this sort is afflicted and tortured with equal torment as
one who is in chains.
11 For many men on account of calamities of this kind, because they
can bear them no longer, lay violent hands on themselves.
12 He then who knows the calamity of a man of this kind and
rescueth him not, committeth great sin, and becometh guilty of the
mans blood.
13 Do therefore good works, whoever of you have received (benefits)
from the Lord, lest, while ye delay to do them, the building of the
tower be completed.
14 For it is on your account that the work of the building has been
interrupted.
15 Unless then ye hasten to do right, the tower will be completed, and
ye shut out. When then he had finished speaking with me, he rose
from the couch and departed, taking with him the shepherd and the
virgins. He said however unto me, that he would send the shepherd
and the virgins back again to my house.588
Codex Sinaiticus:
Didachē or Teaching of the Twelve
Didachē 1
1 There are two ways, one of life and one of death, and there is a great
difference between the two ways.
2 The way of life is this. First of all, thou shalt love the God that made
thee; secondly, Thy neighbor as thyself. And all things whatsoever
thou wouldst not have befall thyself, neither do thou unto another.
3 Now of these words the doctrine is this. Bless them that curse you,
and pray for your enemies and fast for them that persecute you; for
what thank is it, if ye love them that love you? Do not even the
Gentiles the same? But do ye love them that hate you that hate you,
and ye shall not have an enemy.
4 Abstain thou from fleshly and bodily lusts. If any man give thee a
blow on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also, and thou shalt be
perfect; If a man impress thee to go with him one mile, go with him
twain; if a man take away thy cloak, give him thy coat also; if a man
take away from thee that which is thy own, ask it not back, for
neither art thou able.
5 To every man that asketh of thee give, and ask not back for the
Father desireth that gifts be given to all from His own bounties.
Blessed is he that giveth according to the commandment; for he is
guiltless. Woe to him that receiveth; for, if a man receiveth having
need, he is guiltless; but he that hath no need shall give satisfaction
why and wherefore he received and being put in confinement he shall
be examined concerning the deeds that he hath done, and he shall
not come out thence until he hath given back the last farthing.
6 Yea, as touching this also it is said; Let thine alms sweat into thine
hands, until thou have learnt to whom to give.
Didachē 2
1 And this is the second commandment of the teaching.
2 Thou shalt do no murder, thou shalt not commit adultery, thou
shalt not corrupt boys, thou shalt not commit fornication, thou shalt
not steal, thou shalt not deal in magic, thou shalt do no sorcery, thou
shalt not murder a child by abortion nor kill them when born, thou
shalt not covet thy neighbors goods,
3 thou shalt not perjure thyself, thou shalt not bear false witness,
thou shalt not speak evil, thou shalt not cherish a grudge,
4 thou shalt not be double-minded nor double-tongued; for the
double tongue is a snare of death.
5 Thy word shall not be false or empty, but fulfilled by action.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
589
6 Thou shalt not be avaricious nor a plunderer nor a hypocrite nor
ill-tempered nor proud. Thou shalt not entertain an evil design
against thy neighbor.
7 Thou shalt not hate any man but some thou shalt reprove, and for
others thou shalt pray, and others thou shalt love more than thy life.
Didachē 3
1 My child, flee from every evil and everything that resembleth it.
2 Be not angry, for anger leadeth to murder, nor jealous nor
contentious nor wrathful; for of all these things murders are
engendered.
3 My child, be not lustful, for lust leadeth to fornication, neither foul-
speaking neither with uplifted eyes; for of all these things adulteries
are engendered.
4 My child, be no dealer in omens, since it leads to idolatry, nor an
enchanter nor an astrologer nor a magician, neither be willing to look
at them; for from all these things idolatry is engendered.
5 My child, be not a liar, since lying leads to theft, neither avaricious
neither vainglorious; for from all these things thefts are engendered.
6 My child, be not a murmurer, since it leadeth to blasphemy, neither
self-willed neither a thinker of evil thoughts; for from all these things
blasphemies are engendered.
7 But be meek, since the meek shall inherit the earth.
8 Be long-suffering and pitiful and guileless and quiet and kindly and
always fearing the words which thou hast heard.
9 Thou shalt not exalt thyself, neither shalt thou admit boldness into
thy soul. Thy soul shall not cleave together with the lofty, but with
the righteous and humble shalt thou walk.
10 The accidents that befall thee thou shalt receive as good, knowing
that nothing is done without God.
Didachē 4
1 My child, thou shalt remember him that speaketh unto thee the
word of God night and day, and shalt honor him as the Lord; for
whencesoever the Lordship speaketh, there is the Lord.
2 Moreover thou shalt seek out day by day the persons of the saints,
that thou mayest find rest in their words.
3 Thou shalt not make a schism, but thou shalt pacify them that
contend; thou shalt judge righteously, thou shalt not make a
difference in a person to reprove him for transgressions.
4 Thou shalt not doubt whether a thing shall be or not be.
5 Be not thou found holding out thy hands to receive, but drawing
them in as to giving.590
Codex Sinaiticus:
6 If thou hast ought passing through thy hands, thou shalt give a
ransom for thy sins.
7 Thou shalt not hesitate to give, neither shalt thou murmur when
giving; for thou shalt know who is the good paymaster of thy reward.
8 Thou shalt not turn away from him that is in want, but shalt make
thy brother partaker in all things, and shalt not say that anything is
thy own. For if ye are fellow-partakers in that which is imperishable,
how much rather in the things which are perishable?
9 Thou shalt not withhold thy hand from thy son or from thy
daughter, but from their youth thou shalt teach them the fear of God.
10 Thou shalt not command thy bondservant or thine handmaid in
thy bitterness who trust in the same God as thyself, lest haply they
should cease to fear the God who is over both of you; for He cometh,
not to call men with respect of persons, but He cometh to those
whom the Spirit hath prepared.
11 But ye, servants, shall be subject unto your masters, as to a type of
God, in shame and fear.
12 Thou shalt hate all hypocrisy, and everything that is not pleasing
to the Lord.
13 Thou shalt never forsake the commandments of the Lord but shalt
keep those things which thou hast received, neither adding to them
nor taking away from them.
14 In church thou shalt confess thy transgressions, and shalt not
betake thyself to prayer with an evil conscience. This is the way of
life.
Didachē 5
1 But the way of death is this. First of all, it is evil and full of a curse;
murders, adulteries, lusts, fornications, thefts, idolatries, magical
arts, witchcrafts, plunderings, false witnessings, hypocrisies,
doubleness of heart, treachery, pride, malice, stubbornness,
covetousness, foul--speaking, jealousy, boldness, exaltation,
boastfulness;
2 Persecutors of good men, hating truth, loving a lie, not perceiving
the reward of righteousness, not cleaving to the good nor to righteous
judgment, wakeful not for that which is good but for that which is
evil-from whom gentleness and forbearance stand aloof; loving vain
things, pursuing a recompense, not pitying the poor man, not toiling
for him that is oppressed with toil, not recognizing Him that made
them, murderers of children, corrupters of the creatures of God,
turning away from him that is in want, oppressing him that is
afflicted, advocates of the wealthy, unjust judges of the poor,
altogether sinful. May ye be delivered, my children, from all these
things.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
591
Didachē 6
1 See lest any man lead you astray from this way of righteousness, for
he teacheth thee apart from God.
2 For if thou art able to bear the whole yoke of the Lord, thou shalt be
perfect; but if thou art not able, do that which thou art able.
3 But concerning eating, bear that which thou art able; yet abstain by
all means from meat sacrificed to idols; for it is the worship of dead
gods.
Didachē 7
1 But concerning baptism, thus shall ye baptize. Having first recited
all these things, baptize in the name of the Father and of the Son and
of the Holy Spirit in living (running) water.
2 But if thou hast not living water, then baptize in other water; and if
thou art not able in cold, then in warm.
3 But if thou hast neither, then pour water on the head thrice in the
name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit.
4 But before the baptism let him that baptizeth and him that is
baptized fast, and any others also who are able; and thou shalt order
him that is baptized to fast a day or two before.
Didachē 8
1 And let not your fastings be with the hypocrites, for they fast on the
second and the fifth day of the week; but do ye keep your fast on the
fourth and on the preparation (the sixth) day.
2 Neither pray ye as the hypocrites, but as the Lord commanded in
His Gospel, thus pray ye: Our Father, which art in heaven, hallowed
be Thy name; Thy kingdom come; Thy will be done, as in heaven, so
also on earth; give us this day our daily bread; and forgive us our
debt, as we forgive our debtors; and lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from the evil one; for Thine is the power and the glory for
ever and ever.
3 Three times in the day pray ye so.
Didachē 9
1 But as touching the eucharistic thanksgiving give ye thanks thus.
2 First, as regards the cup: We give Thee thanks, O our Father, for
the holy vine of Thy son David, which Thou madest known unto us
through Thy Son Jesus; Thine is the glory for ever and ever.
3 Then as regarding the broken bread: We give Thee thanks, O our
Father, for the life and knowledge which Thou didst make known
unto us through Thy Son Jesus; Thine is the glory for ever and ever.
4 As this broken bread was scattered upon the mountains and being
gathered together became one, so may Thy Church be gathered592
Codex Sinaiticus:
together from the ends of the earth into Thy kingdom; for Thine is
the glory and the power through Jesus Christ for ever and ever.
5 But let no one eat or drink of this eucharistic thanksgiving, but they
that have been baptized into the name of the Lord; for concerning
this also the Lord hath said: Give not that which is holy to the dogs.
Didachē 10
1 And after ye are satisfied thus give ye thanks:
2 We give Thee thanks, Holy Father, for Thy holy name, which Thou
hast made to tabernacle in our hearts, and for the knowledge and
faith and immortality, which Thou hast made known unto us through
Thy Son Jesus; Thine is the glory for ever and ever.
3 Thou, Almighty Master, didst create all things for Thy name’s sake,
and didst give food and drink unto men for enjoyment, that they
might render thanks to Thee; but didst bestow upon us spiritual food
and drink and eternal life through Thy Son.
4 Before all things we give Thee thanks that Thou art powerful; Thine
is the glory for ever and ever.
5 Remember, Lord, Thy Church to deliver it from all evil and to
perfect it in Thy love; and gather it together from the four winds –
even the Church which has been sanctified – into Thy kingdom
which Thou hast prepared for it; for Thine is the power and the glory
for ever and ever.
6 May grace come and may this world pass away. Hosanna to the
God of David. If any man is holy, let him come; if any man is not, let
him repent. Maran Atha. Amen.
7 But permit the prophets to offer thanksgiving as much as they
desire.
Didachē 11
1 Whosoever therefore shall come and teach you all these things that
have been said before, receive him;
2 but if the teacher himself be perverted and teach a different
doctrine to the destruction thereof, hear him not; but if to the
increase of righteousness and the knowledge of the Lord, receive him
as the Lord.
3 But concerning the apostles and prophets, so do ye according to the
ordinance of the Gospel.
4 Let every apostle, when he cometh to you, be received as the Lord;
5 but he shall not abide more than a single day, or if there be need, a
second likewise; but if he abide three days, he is a false prophet.
6 And when he departeth let the apostle receive nothing save bread,
until he findeth shelter; but if he ask money, he is a false prophet.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
593
7 And any prophet speaking in the Spirit ye shall not try neither
discern; for every sin shall be forgiven, but this sin shall not be
forgiven.
8 Yet not every one that speaketh in the Spirit is a prophet, but only
if he have the ways of the Lord. From his ways therefore the false
prophet and the prophet shall be recognized.
9 And no prophet when he ordereth a table in the Spirit shall eat of
it; otherwise he is a false prophet.
10 And every prophet teaching the truth, if he doeth not what he
teacheth, is a false prophet.
11 And every prophet approved and found true, if he doeth ought as
an outward mystery typical of the Church, and yet teacheth you not
to do all that he himself doeth, shall not be judged before you; he
hath his judgment in the presence of God; for in like manner also did
the prophets of old time.
12 And whosoever shall say in the Spirit, Give me silver or anything
else, ye shall not listen to him; but if he tell you to give on behalf of
others that are in want, let no man judge him.
Didachē 12
1 But let every one that cometh in the name of the Lord be received;
and then when ye have tested him ye shall know him, for ye shall
have understanding on the right hand and on the left.
2 If the comer is a traveler, assist him, so far as ye are able; but he
shall not stay with you more than two or three days, if it be
necessary.
3 But if he wishes to settle with you, being a craftsman, let him work
for and eat his bread.
4 But if he has no craft, according to your wisdom provide how he
shall live as a Christian among you, but not in idleness.
5 If he will not do this, he is trafficking upon Christ. Beware of such
men.
Didachē 13
1 But every time prophet desiring to settle among you is worthy of his
food.
2 In like manner a true teacher is also worthy, like the workman, of
his food.
3 Every firstfruit then of the produce of the wine-vat and of the
threshing-floor, of thy oxen and of thy sheep, thou shalt take and give
as the firstfruit to the prophets; for they are your chief-priests.
4 But if ye have not a prophet, give them to the poor.
5 If thou makest bread, take the firstfruit and give according to the
commandment.594
Codex Sinaiticus:
6 In like manner, when thou openest a jar of wine or of oil, take the
firstfruit and give to the prophets;
7 yea and of money and raiment and every possession take the
firstfruit, as shall seem good to thee, and give according to the
commandment.
Didachē 14
1 And on the Lord’s own day gather yourselves together and break
bread and give thanks, first confessing your transgressions, that your
sacrifice may be pure.
2 And let no man, having his dispute with his fellow, join your
assembly until they have been reconciled, that your sacrifice may not
be defiled;
3 for this sacrifice it is that was spoken of by the Lord; In every place
and at every time offer me a pure sacrifice; for I am a great king,
saith the Lord, and My name is wonderful among the nations.
Didachē 15
1 Appoint for yourselves therefore bishops and deacons worthy of the
Lord, men who are meek and not lovers of money, and true and
approved; for unto you they also perform the service of the prophets
and teachers.
2 Therefore despise them not; for they are your honorable men along
with the prophets and teachers.
3 And reprove one another, not in anger but in peace, as ye find in
the Gospel; and let no one speak to any that has gone wrong towards
his neighbor, neither let him hear a word from you, until he repent.
4 But your prayers and your almsgiving and all your deeds so do ye
as ye find it in the Gospel of our Lord.
Didachē 16
1 Be watchful for your life; let your lamps not be quenched and your
loins not ungirdled, but be ye ready; for ye know not the hour the
hour in which our Lord cometh.
2 And ye shall gather yourselves together frequently, seeking what is
fitting for your souls; for the whole time of your faith shall not profit
you, if ye be not perfected at the last season.
3 For in the last days the false prophets and corrupters shall be
multiplied, and the sheep shall be turned into wolves, and love shall
be turned into hate.
4 For as lawlessness increaseth, they shall hate one another and shall
persecute and betray. And then the world-deceiver shall appear as a
son of God; and shall work signs and wonders, and the earth shall beThe H. T. Anderson New Testament
595
delivered into his hands; and he shall do unholy things, which have
never been since the world began.
5 Then all created mankind shall come to the fire of testing, and
many shall be offended and perish; but they that endure in their faith
shall be saved by the Curse Himself.
6 And then shall the signs of the truth appear; first a sign of a rift in
the heaven, then a sign of a voice of a trumpet, and thirdly a
resurrection of the dead;
7 yet not of all, but as it was said The Lord shall come and all His
saints with Him.
8 Then shall the world see the Lord coming upon the clouds of
heaven.596
Codex Sinaiticus:
The Authentic Peter:
The Preaching of
Simeon Kefa from
the Journal of T.
Flavius Clemens
by Ted Dornan & Jackson
Snyder
Only available at
www.Apostolia.us
1464008, 327 pages
Perfect bound book $22.95
Includes E-book and Audio
Book
Ever wonder why Simon Peter only got a couple short letters in
our Scriptures? Wouldn’t someone have recorded Peter’s
AUTHENTIC acts and preaching? Of course his preaching was
recorded! By Clement, an affluent Gentile convert, at the
command of James the Just. So why would the Church Fathers
bury the preaching of their first pope since Clement was their
second pope? Because Peter’s teachings are HEBRAIC. This
volume is one-of-a-kind, containing teachings on many
subjects, including deliverance, healing, true worship, and lost
doctrines. We dispensed with churchy language in restored the
original Hebraic names and titles of people, places and
concepts - and a full GLOSSARY. Your purchase includes the
AUDIO BOOK. To get the AUDIO, go to www.Apostolia.com
or message (801) 605-1715. The Authentic Peter is a great way
to learn the vocabulary of the Hebraic Roots Movement & pick
up biblical Hebrew words.The H. T. Anderson New Testament
NOTES
597598
Codex Sinaiticus:
NOTESThe H. T. Anderson New Testament
NOTES
599600
Codex Sinaiticus:
NOTES
